H. G. WellsContentsBOOK ONE.—THE COMING OF THE MARTIANSI. THE EVE OF THE WARII. THE FALLING STAR.III. ON HORSELL COMMON.IV. THE CYLINDER OPENS.V. THE HEAT-RAY.VI. THE HEAT-RAY IN THE CHOBHAM ROAD.VII. HOW I REACHED HOME.VIII. FRIDAY NIGHT.IX. THE FIGHTING BEGINS.X. IN THE STORM.XI. AT THE WINDOW.XII. WHAT I SAW OF THE DESTRUCTION OF WEYBRIDGE AND SHEPPERTON.XIII. HOW I FELL IN WITH THE CURATE.XIV. IN LONDON.XV. WHAT HAD HAPPENED IN SURREY.XVI. THE EXODUS FROM LONDON.XVII. THE “THUNDER CHILD”.BOOK TWO.—THE EARTH UNDER THE MARTIANSI. UNDER FOOT.II. WHAT WE SAW FROM THE RUINED HOUSE.III. THE DAYS OF IMPRISONMENT.VI. THE DEATH OF THE CURATE.V. THE STILLNESS.VI. THE WORK OF FIFTEEN DAYS.VII. THE MAN ON PUTNEY HILL.VIII. DEAD LONDON.IX. WRECKAGE.X. THE EPILOGUE.BOOK ONETHE COMING OF THE MARTIANSI.THE EVE OF THE WAR.No one would have believed in the last years of the nineteenth centurythat this world was being watched keenly and closely by intelligencesgreater than man’s and yet as mortal as his own; that as men busiedthemselves about their various concerns they were scrutinised andstudied, perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a microscope mightscrutinise the transient creatures that swarm and multiply in a drop ofwater. With infinite complacency men went to and fro over this globeabout their little affairs, serene in their assurance of their empireover matter. It is possible that the infusoria under the microscope dothe same. No one gave a thought to the older worlds of space as sourcesof human danger, or thought of them only to dismiss the idea of lifeupon them as impossible or improbable. It is curious to recall some ofthe mental habits of those departed days. At most terrestrial menfancied there might be other men upon Mars, perhaps inferior tothemselves and ready to welcome a missionary enterprise. Yet across thegulf of space, minds that are to our minds as ours are to those of thebeasts that perish, intellects vast and cool and unsympathetic,regarded this earth with envious eyes, and slowly and surely drew theirplans against us. And early in the twentieth century came the greatdisillusionment.The planet Mars, I scarcely need remind the reader, revolves about thesun at a mean distance of 140,000,000 miles, and the light and heat itreceives from the sun is barely half of that received by this world. Itmust be, if the nebular hypothesis has any truth, older than our world;and long before this earth ceased to be molten, life upon its surfacemust have begun its course. The fact that it is scarcely one seventh ofthe volume of the earth must have accelerated its cooling to thetemperature at which life could begin. It has air and water and allthat is necessary for the support of animated existence.Yet so vain is man, and so blinded by his vanity, that no writer, up tothe very end of the nineteenth century, expressed any idea thatintelligent life might have developed there far, or indeed at all,beyond its earthly level. Nor was it generally understood that sinceMars is older than our earth, with scarcely a quarter of thesuperficial area and remoter from the sun, it necessarily follows thatit is not only more distant from time’s beginning but nearer its end.The secular cooling that must someday overtake our planet has alreadygone far indeed with our neighbour. Its physical condition is stilllargely a mystery, but we know now that even in its equatorial regionthe midday temperature barely approaches that of our coldest winter.Its air is much more attenuated than ours, its oceans have shrunk untilthey cover but a third of its surface, and as its slow seasons changehuge snowcaps gather and melt about either pole and periodicallyinundate its temperate zones. That last stage of exhaustion, which tous is still incredibly remote, has become a present-day problem for theinhabitants of Mars. The immediate pressure of necessity has brightenedtheir intellects, enlarged their powers, and hardened their hearts. Andlooking across space with instruments, and intelligences such as wehave scarcely dreamed of, they see, at its nearest distance only35,000,000 of miles sunward of them, a morning star of hope, our ownwarmer planet, green with vegetation and grey with water, with a cloudyatmosphere eloquent of fertility, with glimpses through its driftingcloud wisps of broad stretches of populous country and narrow,navy-crowded seas.And we men, the creatures who inhabit this earth, must be to them atleast as alien and lowly as are the monkeys and lemurs to us. Theintellectual side of man already admits that life is an incessantstruggle for existence, and it would seem that this too is the beliefof the minds upon Mars. Their world is far gone in its cooling and thisworld is still crowded with life, but crowded only with what theyregard as inferior animals. To carry warfare sunward is, indeed, theironly escape from the destruction that, generation after generation,creeps upon them.And before we judge of them too harshly we must remember what ruthlessand utter destruction our own species has wrought, not only uponanimals, such as the vanished bison and the dodo, but upon its inferiorraces. The Tasmanians, in spite of their human likeness, were entirelyswept out of existence in a war of extermination waged by Europeanimmigrants, in the space of fifty years. Are we such apostles of mercyas to complain if the Martians warred in the same spirit?The Martians seem to have calculated their descent with amazingsubtlety—their mathematical learning is evidently far in excess ofours—and to have carried out their preparations with a well-nighperfect unanimity. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have seenthe gathering trouble far back in the nineteenth century. Men likeSchiaparelli watched the red planet—it is odd, by-the-bye, that forcountless centuries Mars has been the star of war—but failed tointerpret the fluctuating appearances of the markings they mapped sowell. All that time the Martians must have been getting ready.During the opposition of 1894 a great light was seen on the illuminatedpart of the disk, first at the Lick Observatory, then by Perrotin ofNice, and then by other observers. English readers heard of it first inthe issue of _Nature_ dated August 2. I am inclined to think that thisblaze may have been the casting of the huge gun, in the vast pit sunkinto their planet, from which their shots were fired at us. Peculiarmarkings, as yet unexplained, were seen near the site of that outbreakduring the next two oppositions.The storm burst upon us six years ago now. As Mars approachedopposition, Lavelle of Java set the wires of the astronomical exchangepalpitating with the amazing intelligence of a huge outbreak ofincandescent gas upon the planet. It had occurred towards midnight ofthe twelfth; and the spectroscope, to which he had at once resorted,indicated a mass of flaming gas, chiefly hydrogen, moving with anenormous velocity towards this earth. This jet of fire had becomeinvisible about a quarter past twelve. He compared it to a colossalpuff of flame suddenly and violently squirted out of the planet, “asflaming gases rushed out of a gun.”A singularly appropriate phrase it proved. Yet the next day there wasnothing of this in the papers except a little note in the _DailyTelegraph_, and the world went in ignorance of one of the gravestdangers that ever threatened the human race. I might not have heard ofthe eruption at all had I not met Ogilvy, the well-known astronomer, atOttershaw. He was immensely excited at the news, and in the excess ofhis feelings invited me up to take a turn with him that night in ascrutiny of the red planet.In spite of all that has happened since, I still remember that vigilvery distinctly: the black and silent observatory, the shadowed lanternthrowing a feeble glow upon the floor in the corner, the steady tickingof the clockwork of the telescope, the little slit in the roof—anoblong profundity with the stardust streaked across it. Ogilvy movedabout, invisible but audible. Looking through the telescope, one saw acircle of deep blue and the little round planet swimming in the field.It seemed such a little thing, so bright and small and still, faintlymarked with transverse stripes, and slightly flattened from the perfectround. But so little it was, so silvery warm—a pin’s head of light! Itwas as if it quivered, but really this was the telescope vibrating withthe activity of the clockwork that kept the planet in view.As I watched, the planet seemed to grow larger and smaller and toadvance and recede, but that was simply that my eye was tired. Fortymillions of miles it was from us—more than forty millions of miles ofvoid. Few people realise the immensity of vacancy in which the dust ofthe material universe swims.Near it in the field, I remember, were three faint points of light,three telescopic stars infinitely remote, and all around it was theunfathomable darkness of empty space. You know how that blackness lookson a frosty starlight night. In a telescope it seems far profounder.And invisible to me because it was so remote and small, flying swiftlyand steadily towards me across that incredible distance, drawing nearerevery minute by so many thousands of miles, came the Thing they weresending us, the Thing that was to bring so much struggle and calamityand death to the earth. I never dreamed of it then as I watched; no oneon earth dreamed of that unerring missile.That night, too, there was another jetting out of gas from the distantplanet. I saw it. A reddish flash at the edge, the slightest projectionof the outline just as the chronometer struck midnight; and at that Itold Ogilvy and he took my place. The night was warm and I was thirsty,and I went stretching my legs clumsily and feeling my way in thedarkness, to the little table where the siphon stood, while Ogilvyexclaimed at the streamer of gas that came out towards us.That night another invisible missile started on its way to the earthfrom Mars, just a second or so under twenty-four hours after the firstone. I remember how I sat on the table there in the blackness, withpatches of green and crimson swimming before my eyes. I wished I had alight to smoke by, little suspecting the meaning of the minute gleam Ihad seen and all that it would presently bring me. Ogilvy watched tillone, and then gave it up; and we lit the lantern and walked over to hishouse. Down below in the darkness were Ottershaw and Chertsey and alltheir hundreds of people, sleeping in peace.He was full of speculation that night about the condition of Mars, andscoffed at the vulgar idea of its having inhabitants who weresignalling us. His idea was that meteorites might be falling in a heavyshower upon the planet, or that a huge volcanic explosion was inprogress. He pointed out to me how unlikely it was that organicevolution had taken the same direction in the two adjacent planets.“The chances against anything manlike on Mars are a million to one,” hesaid.Hundreds of observers saw the flame that night and the night afterabout midnight, and again the night after; and so for ten nights, aflame each night. Why the shots ceased after the tenth no one on earthhas attempted to explain. It may be the gases of the firing caused theMartians inconvenience. Dense clouds of smoke or dust, visible througha powerful telescope on earth as little grey, fluctuating patches,spread through the clearness of the planet’s atmosphere and obscuredits more familiar features.Even the daily papers woke up to the disturbances at last, and popularnotes appeared here, there, and everywhere concerning the volcanoesupon Mars. The seriocomic periodical _Punch_, I remember, made a happyuse of it in the political cartoon. And, all unsuspected, thosemissiles the Martians had fired at us drew earthward, rushing now at apace of many miles a second through the empty gulf of space, hour byhour and day by day, nearer and nearer. It seems to me now almostincredibly wonderful that, with that swift fate hanging over us, mencould go about their petty concerns as they did. I remember howjubilant Markham was at securing a new photograph of the planet for theillustrated paper he edited in those days. People in these latter timesscarcely realise the abundance and enterprise of our nineteenth-centurypapers. For my own part, I was much occupied in learning to ride thebicycle, and busy upon a series of papers discussing the probabledevelopments of moral ideas as civilisation progressed.One night (the first missile then could scarcely have been 10,000,000miles away) I went for a walk with my wife. It was starlight and Iexplained the Signs of the Zodiac to her, and pointed out Mars, abright dot of light creeping zenithward, towards which so manytelescopes were pointed. It was a warm night. Coming home, a party ofexcursionists from Chertsey or Isleworth passed us singing and playingmusic. There were lights in the upper windows of the houses as thepeople went to bed. From the railway station in the distance came thesound of shunting trains, ringing and rumbling, softened almost intomelody by the distance. My wife pointed out to me the brightness of thered, green, and yellow signal lights hanging in a framework against thesky. It seemed so safe and tranquil.II.THE FALLING STAR.Then came the night of the first falling star. It was seen early in themorning, rushing over Winchester eastward, a line of flame high in theatmosphere. Hundreds must have seen it, and taken it for an ordinaryfalling star. Albin described it as leaving a greenish streak behind itthat glowed for some seconds. Denning, our greatest authority onmeteorites, stated that the height of its first appearance was aboutninety or one hundred miles. It seemed to him that it fell to earthabout one hundred miles east of him.I was at home at that hour and writing in my study; and although myFrench windows face towards Ottershaw and the blind was up (for I lovedin those days to look up at the night sky), I saw nothing of it. Yetthis strangest of all things that ever came to earth from outer spacemust have fallen while I was sitting there, visible to me had I onlylooked up as it passed. Some of those who saw its flight say ittravelled with a hissing sound. I myself heard nothing of that. Manypeople in Berkshire, Surrey, and Middlesex must have seen the fall ofit, and, at most, have thought that another meteorite had descended. Noone seems to have troubled to look for the fallen mass that night.But very early in the morning poor Ogilvy, who had seen the shootingstar and who was persuaded that a meteorite lay somewhere on the commonbetween Horsell, Ottershaw, and Woking, rose early with the idea offinding it. Find it he did, soon after dawn, and not far from thesand-pits. An enormous hole had been made by the impact of theprojectile, and the sand and gravel had been flung violently in everydirection over the heath, forming heaps visible a mile and a half away.The heather was on fire eastward, and a thin blue smoke rose againstthe dawn.The Thing itself lay almost entirely buried in sand, amidst thescattered splinters of a fir tree it had shivered to fragments in itsdescent. The uncovered part had the appearance of a huge cylinder,caked over and its outline softened by a thick scaly dun-colouredincrustation. It had a diameter of about thirty yards. He approachedthe mass, surprised at the size and more so at the shape, since mostmeteorites are rounded more or less completely. It was, however, stillso hot from its flight through the air as to forbid his near approach.A stirring noise within its cylinder he ascribed to the unequal coolingof its surface; for at that time it had not occurred to him that itmight be hollow.He remained standing at the edge of the pit that the Thing had made foritself, staring at its strange appearance, astonished chiefly at itsunusual shape and colour, and dimly perceiving even then some evidenceof design in its arrival. The early morning was wonderfully still, andthe sun, just clearing the pine trees towards Weybridge, was alreadywarm. He did not remember hearing any birds that morning, there wascertainly no breeze stirring, and the only sounds were the faintmovements from within the cindery cylinder. He was all alone on thecommon.Then suddenly he noticed with a start that some of the grey clinker,the ashy incrustation that covered the meteorite, was falling off thecircular edge of the end. It was dropping off in flakes and rainingdown upon the sand. A large piece suddenly came off and fell with asharp noise that brought his heart into his mouth.For a minute he scarcely realised what this meant, and, although theheat was excessive, he clambered down into the pit close to the bulk tosee the Thing more clearly. He fancied even then that the cooling ofthe body might account for this, but what disturbed that idea was thefact that the ash was falling only from the end of the cylinder.And then he perceived that, very slowly, the circular top of thecylinder was rotating on its body. It was such a gradual movement thathe discovered it only through noticing that a black mark that had beennear him five minutes ago was now at the other side of thecircumference. Even then he scarcely understood what this indicated,until he heard a muffled grating sound and saw the black mark jerkforward an inch or so. Then the thing came upon him in a flash. Thecylinder was artificial—hollow—with an end that screwed out! Somethingwithin the cylinder was unscrewing the top!“Good heavens!” said Ogilvy. “There’s a man in it—men in it! Halfroasted to death! Trying to escape!”At once, with a quick mental leap, he linked the Thing with the flashupon Mars.The thought of the confined creature was so dreadful to him that heforgot the heat and went forward to the cylinder to help turn. Butluckily the dull radiation arrested him before he could burn his handson the still-glowing metal. At that he stood irresolute for a moment,then turned, scrambled out of the pit, and set off running wildly intoWoking. The time then must have been somewhere about six o’clock. Hemet a waggoner and tried to make him understand, but the tale he toldand his appearance were so wild—his hat had fallen off in the pit—thatthe man simply drove on. He was equally unsuccessful with the potmanwho was just unlocking the doors of the public-house by Horsell Bridge.The fellow thought he was a lunatic at large and made an unsuccessfulattempt to shut him into the taproom. That sobered him a little; andwhen he saw Henderson, the London journalist, in his garden, he calledover the palings and made himself understood.“Henderson,” he called, “you saw that shooting star last night?”“Well?” said Henderson.“It’s out on Horsell Common now.”“Good Lord!” said Henderson. “Fallen meteorite! That’s good.”“But it’s something more than a meteorite. It’s a cylinder—anartificial cylinder, man! And there’s something inside.”Henderson stood up with his spade in his hand.“What’s that?” he said. He was deaf in one ear.Ogilvy told him all that he had seen. Henderson was a minute or sotaking it in. Then he dropped his spade, snatched up his jacket, andcame out into the road. The two men hurried back at once to the common,and found the cylinder still lying in the same position. But now thesounds inside had ceased, and a thin circle of bright metal showedbetween the top and the body of the cylinder. Air was either enteringor escaping at the rim with a thin, sizzling sound.They listened, rapped on the scaly burnt metal with a stick, and,meeting with no response, they both concluded the man or men insidemust be insensible or dead.Of course the two were quite unable to do anything. They shoutedconsolation and promises, and went off back to the town again to gethelp. One can imagine them, covered with sand, excited and disordered,running up the little street in the bright sunlight just as the shopfolks were taking down their shutters and people were opening theirbedroom windows. Henderson went into the railway station at once, inorder to telegraph the news to London. The newspaper articles hadprepared men’s minds for the reception of the idea.By eight o’clock a number of boys and unemployed men had alreadystarted for the common to see the “dead men from Mars.” That was theform the story took. I heard of it first from my newspaper boy about aquarter to nine when I went out to get my _Daily Chronicle_. I wasnaturally startled, and lost no time in going out and across theOttershaw bridge to the sand-pits.III.ON HORSELL COMMON.I found a little crowd of perhaps twenty people surrounding the hugehole in which the cylinder lay. I have already described the appearanceof that colossal bulk, embedded in the ground. The turf and gravelabout it seemed charred as if by a sudden explosion. No doubt itsimpact had caused a flash of fire. Henderson and Ogilvy were not there.I think they perceived that nothing was to be done for the present, andhad gone away to breakfast at Henderson’s house.There were four or five boys sitting on the edge of the Pit, with theirfeet dangling, and amusing themselves—until I stopped them—by throwingstones at the giant mass. After I had spoken to them about it, theybegan playing at “touch” in and out of the group of bystanders.Among these were a couple of cyclists, a jobbing gardener I employedsometimes, a girl carrying a baby, Gregg the butcher and his littleboy, and two or three loafers and golf caddies who were accustomed tohang about the railway station. There was very little talking. Few ofthe common people in England had anything but the vaguest astronomicalideas in those days. Most of them were staring quietly at the big tablelike end of the cylinder, which was still as Ogilvy and Henderson hadleft it. I fancy the popular expectation of a heap of charred corpseswas disappointed at this inanimate bulk. Some went away while I wasthere, and other people came. I clambered into the pit and fancied Iheard a faint movement under my feet. The top had certainly ceased torotate.It was only when I got thus close to it that the strangeness of thisobject was at all evident to me. At the first glance it was really nomore exciting than an overturned carriage or a tree blown across theroad. Not so much so, indeed. It looked like a rusty gas float. Itrequired a certain amount of scientific education to perceive that thegrey scale of the Thing was no common oxide, that the yellowish-whitemetal that gleamed in the crack between the lid and the cylinder had anunfamiliar hue. “Extra-terrestrial” had no meaning for most of theonlookers.At that time it was quite clear in my own mind that the Thing had comefrom the planet Mars, but I judged it improbable that it contained anyliving creature. I thought the unscrewing might be automatic. In spiteof Ogilvy, I still believed that there were men in Mars. My mind ranfancifully on the possibilities of its containing manuscript, on thedifficulties in translation that might arise, whether we should findcoins and models in it, and so forth. Yet it was a little too large forassurance on this idea. I felt an impatience to see it opened. Abouteleven, as nothing seemed happening, I walked back, full of suchthought, to my home in Maybury. But I found it difficult to get to workupon my abstract investigations.In the afternoon the appearance of the common had altered very much.The early editions of the evening papers had startled London withenormous headlines:“A MESSAGE RECEIVED FROM MARS.”“REMARKABLE STORY FROM WOKING,”and so forth. In addition, Ogilvy’s wire to the Astronomical Exchangehad roused every observatory in the three kingdoms.There were half a dozen flys or more from the Woking station standingin the road by the sand-pits, a basket-chaise from Chobham, and arather lordly carriage. Besides that, there was quite a heap ofbicycles. In addition, a large number of people must have walked, inspite of the heat of the day, from Woking and Chertsey, so that therewas altogether quite a considerable crowd—one or two gaily dressedladies among the others.It was glaringly hot, not a cloud in the sky nor a breath of wind, andthe only shadow was that of the few scattered pine trees. The burningheather had been extinguished, but the level ground towards Ottershawwas blackened as far as one could see, and still giving off verticalstreamers of smoke. An enterprising sweet-stuff dealer in the ChobhamRoad had sent up his son with a barrow-load of green apples and gingerbeer.Going to the edge of the pit, I found it occupied by a group of abouthalf a dozen men—Henderson, Ogilvy, and a tall, fair-haired man that Iafterwards learned was Stent, the Astronomer Royal, with severalworkmen wielding spades and pickaxes. Stent was giving directions in aclear, high-pitched voice. He was standing on the cylinder, which wasnow evidently much cooler; his face was crimson and streaming withperspiration, and something seemed to have irritated him.A large portion of the cylinder had been uncovered, though its lowerend was still embedded. As soon as Ogilvy saw me among the staringcrowd on the edge of the pit he called to me to come down, and asked meif I would mind going over to see Lord Hilton, the lord of the manor.The growing crowd, he said, was becoming a serious impediment to theirexcavations, especially the boys. They wanted a light railing put up,and help to keep the people back. He told me that a faint stirring wasoccasionally still audible within the case, but that the workmen hadfailed to unscrew the top, as it afforded no grip to them. The caseappeared to be enormously thick, and it was possible that the faintsounds we heard represented a noisy tumult in the interior.I was very glad to do as he asked, and so become one of the privilegedspectators within the contemplated enclosure. I failed to find LordHilton at his house, but I was told he was expected from London by thesix o’clock train from Waterloo; and as it was then about a quarterpast five, I went home, had some tea, and walked up to the station towaylay him.IV.THE CYLINDER OPENS.When I returned to the common the sun was setting. Scattered groupswere hurrying from the direction of Woking, and one or two persons werereturning. The crowd about the pit had increased, and stood out blackagainst the lemon yellow of the sky—a couple of hundred people,perhaps. There were raised voices, and some sort of struggle appearedto be going on about the pit. Strange imaginings passed through mymind. As I drew nearer I heard Stent’s voice:“Keep back! Keep back!”A boy came running towards me.“It’s a-movin’,” he said to me as he passed; “a-screwin’ and a-screwin’out. I don’t like it. I’m a-goin’ ’ome, I am.”I went on to the crowd. There were really, I should think, two or threehundred people elbowing and jostling one another, the one or two ladiesthere being by no means the least active.“He’s fallen in the pit!” cried some one.“Keep back!” said several.The crowd swayed a little, and I elbowed my way through. Every oneseemed greatly excited. I heard a peculiar humming sound from the pit.“I say!” said Ogilvy; “help keep these idiots back. We don’t knowwhat’s in the confounded thing, you know!”I saw a young man, a shop assistant in Woking I believe he was,standing on the cylinder and trying to scramble out of the hole again.The crowd had pushed him in.The end of the cylinder was being screwed out from within. Nearly twofeet of shining screw projected. Somebody blundered against me, and Inarrowly missed being pitched onto the top of the screw. I turned, andas I did so the screw must have come out, for the lid of the cylinderfell upon the gravel with a ringing concussion. I stuck my elbow intothe person behind me, and turned my head towards the Thing again. For amoment that circular cavity seemed perfectly black. I had the sunset inmy eyes.I think everyone expected to see a man emerge—possibly something alittle unlike us terrestrial men, but in all essentials a man. I know Idid. But, looking, I presently saw something stirring within theshadow: greyish billowy movements, one above another, and then twoluminous disks—like eyes. Then something resembling a little greysnake, about the thickness of a walking stick, coiled up out of thewrithing middle, and wriggled in the air towards me—and then another.A sudden chill came over me. There was a loud shriek from a womanbehind. I half turned, keeping my eyes fixed upon the cylinder still,from which other tentacles were now projecting, and began pushing myway back from the edge of the pit. I saw astonishment giving place tohorror on the faces of the people about me. I heard inarticulateexclamations on all sides. There was a general movement backwards. Isaw the shopman struggling still on the edge of the pit. I found myselfalone, and saw the people on the other side of the pit running off,Stent among them. I looked again at the cylinder, and ungovernableterror gripped me. I stood petrified and staring.A big greyish rounded bulk, the size, perhaps, of a bear, was risingslowly and painfully out of the cylinder. As it bulged up and caughtthe light, it glistened like wet leather.Two large dark-coloured eyes were regarding me steadfastly. The massthat framed them, the head of the thing, was rounded, and had, onemight say, a face. There was a mouth under the eyes, the lipless brimof which quivered and panted, and dropped saliva. The whole creatureheaved and pulsated convulsively. A lank tentacular appendage grippedthe edge of the cylinder, another swayed in the air.Those who have never seen a living Martian can scarcely imagine thestrange horror of its appearance. The peculiar V-shaped mouth with itspointed upper lip, the absence of brow ridges, the absence of a chinbeneath the wedgelike lower lip, the incessant quivering of this mouth,the Gorgon groups of tentacles, the tumultuous breathing of the lungsin a strange atmosphere, the evident heaviness and painfulness ofmovement due to the greater gravitational energy of the earth—aboveall, the extraordinary intensity of the immense eyes—were at oncevital, intense, inhuman, crippled and monstrous. There was somethingfungoid in the oily brown skin, something in the clumsy deliberation ofthe tedious movements unspeakably nasty. Even at this first encounter,this first glimpse, I was overcome with disgust and dread.Suddenly the monster vanished. It had toppled over the brim of thecylinder and fallen into the pit, with a thud like the fall of a greatmass of leather. I heard it give a peculiar thick cry, and forthwithanother of these creatures appeared darkly in the deep shadow of theaperture.I turned and, running madly, made for the first group of trees, perhapsa hundred yards away; but I ran slantingly and stumbling, for I couldnot avert my face from these things.There, among some young pine trees and furze bushes, I stopped,panting, and waited further developments. The common round thesand-pits was dotted with people, standing like myself in ahalf-fascinated terror, staring at these creatures, or rather at theheaped gravel at the edge of the pit in which they lay. And then, witha renewed horror, I saw a round, black object bobbing up and down onthe edge of the pit. It was the head of the shopman who had fallen in,but showing as a little black object against the hot western sun. Nowhe got his shoulder and knee up, and again he seemed to slip back untilonly his head was visible. Suddenly he vanished, and I could havefancied a faint shriek had reached me. I had a momentary impulse to goback and help him that my fears overruled.Everything was then quite invisible, hidden by the deep pit and theheap of sand that the fall of the cylinder had made. Anyone comingalong the road from Chobham or Woking would have been amazed at thesight—a dwindling multitude of perhaps a hundred people or morestanding in a great irregular circle, in ditches, behind bushes, behindgates and hedges, saying little to one another and that in short,excited shouts, and staring, staring hard at a few heaps of sand. Thebarrow of ginger beer stood, a queer derelict, black against theburning sky, and in the sand-pits was a row of deserted vehicles withtheir horses feeding out of nosebags or pawing the ground.V.THE HEAT-RAY.After the glimpse I had had of the Martians emerging from the cylinderin which they had come to the earth from their planet, a kind offascination paralysed my actions. I remained standing knee-deep in theheather, staring at the mound that hid them. I was a battleground offear and curiosity.I did not dare to go back towards the pit, but I felt a passionatelonging to peer into it. I began walking, therefore, in a big curve,seeking some point of vantage and continually looking at the sand-heapsthat hid these new-comers to our earth. Once a leash of thin blackwhips, like the arms of an octopus, flashed across the sunset and wasimmediately withdrawn, and afterwards a thin rod rose up, joint byjoint, bearing at its apex a circular disk that spun with a wobblingmotion. What could be going on there?Most of the spectators had gathered in one or two groups—one a littlecrowd towards Woking, the other a knot of people in the direction ofChobham. Evidently they shared my mental conflict. There were few nearme. One man I approached—he was, I perceived, a neighbour of mine,though I did not know his name—and accosted. But it was scarcely a timefor articulate conversation.“What ugly _brutes_!” he said. “Good God! What ugly brutes!” Herepeated this over and over again.“Did you see a man in the pit?” I said; but he made no answer to that.We became silent, and stood watching for a time side by side, deriving,I fancy, a certain comfort in one another’s company. Then I shifted myposition to a little knoll that gave me the advantage of a yard or moreof elevation and when I looked for him presently he was walking towardsWoking.The sunset faded to twilight before anything further happened. Thecrowd far away on the left, towards Woking, seemed to grow, and I heardnow a faint murmur from it. The little knot of people towards Chobhamdispersed. There was scarcely an intimation of movement from the pit.It was this, as much as anything, that gave people courage, and Isuppose the new arrivals from Woking also helped to restore confidence.At any rate, as the dusk came on a slow, intermittent movement upon thesand-pits began, a movement that seemed to gather force as thestillness of the evening about the cylinder remained unbroken. Verticalblack figures in twos and threes would advance, stop, watch, andadvance again, spreading out as they did so in a thin irregularcrescent that promised to enclose the pit in its attenuated horns. I,too, on my side began to move towards the pit.Then I saw some cabmen and others had walked boldly into the sand-pits,and heard the clatter of hoofs and the gride of wheels. I saw a ladtrundling off the barrow of apples. And then, within thirty yards ofthe pit, advancing from the direction of Horsell, I noted a littleblack knot of men, the foremost of whom was waving a white flag.This was the Deputation. There had been a hasty consultation, and sincethe Martians were evidently, in spite of their repulsive forms,intelligent creatures, it had been resolved to show them, byapproaching them with signals, that we too were intelligent.Flutter, flutter, went the flag, first to the right, then to the left.It was too far for me to recognise anyone there, but afterwards Ilearned that Ogilvy, Stent, and Henderson were with others in thisattempt at communication. This little group had in its advance draggedinward, so to speak, the circumference of the now almost completecircle of people, and a number of dim black figures followed it atdiscreet distances.Suddenly there was a flash of light, and a quantity of luminousgreenish smoke came out of the pit in three distinct puffs, which droveup, one after the other, straight into the still air.This smoke (or flame, perhaps, would be the better word for it) was sobright that the deep blue sky overhead and the hazy stretches of browncommon towards Chertsey, set with black pine trees, seemed to darkenabruptly as these puffs arose, and to remain the darker after theirdispersal. At the same time a faint hissing sound became audible.Beyond the pit stood the little wedge of people with the white flag atits apex, arrested by these phenomena, a little knot of small verticalblack shapes upon the black ground. As the green smoke arose, theirfaces flashed out pallid green, and faded again as it vanished. Thenslowly the hissing passed into a humming, into a long, loud, droningnoise. Slowly a humped shape rose out of the pit, and the ghost of abeam of light seemed to flicker out from it.Forthwith flashes of actual flame, a bright glare leaping from one toanother, sprang from the scattered group of men. It was as if someinvisible jet impinged upon them and flashed into white flame. It wasas if each man were suddenly and momentarily turned to fire.Then, by the light of their own destruction, I saw them staggering andfalling, and their supporters turning to run.I stood staring, not as yet realising that this was death leaping fromman to man in that little distant crowd. All I felt was that it wassomething very strange. An almost noiseless and blinding flash oflight, and a man fell headlong and lay still; and as the unseen shaftof heat passed over them, pine trees burst into fire, and every dryfurze bush became with one dull thud a mass of flames. And far awaytowards Knaphill I saw the flashes of trees and hedges and woodenbuildings suddenly set alight.It was sweeping round swiftly and steadily, this flaming death, thisinvisible, inevitable sword of heat. I perceived it coming towards meby the flashing bushes it touched, and was too astounded and stupefiedto stir. I heard the crackle of fire in the sand-pits and the suddensqueal of a horse that was as suddenly stilled. Then it was as if aninvisible yet intensely heated finger were drawn through the heatherbetween me and the Martians, and all along a curving line beyond thesand-pits the dark ground smoked and crackled. Something fell with acrash far away to the left where the road from Woking station opens outon the common. Forth-with the hissing and humming ceased, and theblack, dome-like object sank slowly out of sight into the pit.All this had happened with such swiftness that I had stood motionless,dumbfounded and dazzled by the flashes of light. Had that death sweptthrough a full circle, it must inevitably have slain me in my surprise.But it passed and spared me, and left the night about me suddenly darkand unfamiliar.The undulating common seemed now dark almost to blackness, except whereits roadways lay grey and pale under the deep blue sky of the earlynight. It was dark, and suddenly void of men. Overhead the stars weremustering, and in the west the sky was still a pale, bright, almostgreenish blue. The tops of the pine trees and the roofs of Horsell cameout sharp and black against the western afterglow. The Martians andtheir appliances were altogether invisible, save for that thin mastupon which their restless mirror wobbled. Patches of bush and isolatedtrees here and there smoked and glowed still, and the houses towardsWoking station were sending up spires of flame into the stillness ofthe evening air.Nothing was changed save for that and a terrible astonishment. Thelittle group of black specks with the flag of white had been swept outof existence, and the stillness of the evening, so it seemed to me, hadscarcely been broken.It came to me that I was upon this dark common, helpless, unprotected,and alone. Suddenly, like a thing falling upon me from without,came—fear.With an effort I turned and began a stumbling run through the heather.The fear I felt was no rational fear, but a panic terror not only ofthe Martians, but of the dusk and stillness all about me. Such anextraordinary effect in unmanning me it had that I ran weeping silentlyas a child might do. Once I had turned, I did not dare to look back.I remember I felt an extraordinary persuasion that I was being playedwith, that presently, when I was upon the very verge of safety, thismysterious death—as swift as the passage of light—would leap after mefrom the pit about the cylinder, and strike me down.VI.THE HEAT-RAY IN THE CHOBHAM ROAD.It is still a matter of wonder how the Martians are able to slay men soswiftly and so silently. Many think that in some way they are able togenerate an intense heat in a chamber of practically absolutenon-conductivity. This intense heat they project in a parallel beamagainst any object they choose, by means of a polished parabolic mirrorof unknown composition, much as the parabolic mirror of a lighthouseprojects a beam of light. But no one has absolutely proved thesedetails. However it is done, it is certain that a beam of heat is theessence of the matter. Heat, and invisible, instead of visible, light.Whatever is combustible flashes into flame at its touch, lead runs likewater, it softens iron, cracks and melts glass, and when it falls uponwater, incontinently that explodes into steam.That night nearly forty people lay under the starlight about the pit,charred and distorted beyond recognition, and all night long the commonfrom Horsell to Maybury was deserted and brightly ablaze.The news of the massacre probably reached Chobham, Woking, andOttershaw about the same time. In Woking the shops had closed when thetragedy happened, and a number of people, shop people and so forth,attracted by the stories they had heard, were walking over the HorsellBridge and along the road between the hedges that runs out at last uponthe common. You may imagine the young people brushed up after thelabours of the day, and making this novelty, as they would make anynovelty, the excuse for walking together and enjoying a trivialflirtation. You may figure to yourself the hum of voices along the roadin the gloaming. . . .As yet, of course, few people in Woking even knew that the cylinder hadopened, though poor Henderson had sent a messenger on a bicycle to thepost office with a special wire to an evening paper.As these folks came out by twos and threes upon the open, they foundlittle knots of people talking excitedly and peering at the spinningmirror over the sand-pits, and the newcomers were, no doubt, sooninfected by the excitement of the occasion.By half past eight, when the Deputation was destroyed, there may havebeen a crowd of three hundred people or more at this place, besidesthose who had left the road to approach the Martians nearer. There werethree policemen too, one of whom was mounted, doing their best, underinstructions from Stent, to keep the people back and deter them fromapproaching the cylinder. There was some booing from those morethoughtless and excitable souls to whom a crowd is always an occasionfor noise and horse-play.Stent and Ogilvy, anticipating some possibilities of a collision, hadtelegraphed from Horsell to the barracks as soon as the Martiansemerged, for the help of a company of soldiers to protect these strangecreatures from violence. After that they returned to lead thatill-fated advance. The description of their death, as it was seen bythe crowd, tallies very closely with my own impressions: the threepuffs of green smoke, the deep humming note, and the flashes of flame.But that crowd of people had a far narrower escape than mine. Only thefact that a hummock of heathery sand intercepted the lower part of theHeat-Ray saved them. Had the elevation of the parabolic mirror been afew yards higher, none could have lived to tell the tale. They saw theflashes and the men falling and an invisible hand, as it were, lit thebushes as it hurried towards them through the twilight. Then, with awhistling note that rose above the droning of the pit, the beam swungclose over their heads, lighting the tops of the beech trees that linethe road, and splitting the bricks, smashing the windows, firing thewindow frames, and bringing down in crumbling ruin a portion of thegable of the house nearest the corner.In the sudden thud, hiss, and glare of the igniting trees, thepanic-stricken crowd seems to have swayed hesitatingly for somemoments. Sparks and burning twigs began to fall into the road, andsingle leaves like puffs of flame. Hats and dresses caught fire. Thencame a crying from the common. There were shrieks and shouts, andsuddenly a mounted policeman came galloping through the confusion withhis hands clasped over his head, screaming.“They’re coming!” a woman shrieked, and incontinently everyone wasturning and pushing at those behind, in order to clear their way toWoking again. They must have bolted as blindly as a flock of sheep.Where the road grows narrow and black between the high banks the crowdjammed, and a desperate struggle occurred. All that crowd did notescape; three persons at least, two women and a little boy, werecrushed and trampled there, and left to die amid the terror and thedarkness.VII.HOW I REACHED HOME.For my own part, I remember nothing of my flight except the stress ofblundering against trees and stumbling through the heather. All aboutme gathered the invisible terrors of the Martians; that pitiless swordof heat seemed whirling to and fro, flourishing overhead before itdescended and smote me out of life. I came into the road between thecrossroads and Horsell, and ran along this to the crossroads.At last I could go no further; I was exhausted with the violence of myemotion and of my flight, and I staggered and fell by the wayside. Thatwas near the bridge that crosses the canal by the gasworks. I fell andlay still.I must have remained there some time.I sat up, strangely perplexed. For a moment, perhaps, I could notclearly understand how I came there. My terror had fallen from me likea garment. My hat had gone, and my collar had burst away from itsfastener. A few minutes before, there had only been three real thingsbefore me—the immensity of the night and space and nature, my ownfeebleness and anguish, and the near approach of death. Now it was asif something turned over, and the point of view altered abruptly. Therewas no sensible transition from one state of mind to the other. I wasimmediately the self of every day again—a decent, ordinary citizen. Thesilent common, the impulse of my flight, the starting flames, were asif they had been in a dream. I asked myself had these latter thingsindeed happened? I could not credit it.I rose and walked unsteadily up the steep incline of the bridge. Mymind was blank wonder. My muscles and nerves seemed drained of theirstrength. I dare say I staggered drunkenly. A head rose over the arch,and the figure of a workman carrying a basket appeared. Beside him rana little boy. He passed me, wishing me good night. I was minded tospeak to him, but did not. I answered his greeting with a meaninglessmumble and went on over the bridge.Over the Maybury arch a train, a billowing tumult of white, firelitsmoke, and a long caterpillar of lighted windows, went flyingsouth—clatter, clatter, clap, rap, and it had gone. A dim group ofpeople talked in the gate of one of the houses in the pretty little rowof gables that was called Oriental Terrace. It was all so real and sofamiliar. And that behind me! It was frantic, fantastic! Such things, Itold myself, could not be.Perhaps I am a man of exceptional moods. I do not know how far myexperience is common. At times I suffer from the strangest sense ofdetachment from myself and the world about me; I seem to watch it allfrom the outside, from somewhere inconceivably remote, out of time, outof space, out of the stress and tragedy of it all. This feeling wasvery strong upon me that night. Here was another side to my dream.But the trouble was the blank incongruity of this serenity and theswift death flying yonder, not two miles away. There was a noise ofbusiness from the gasworks, and the electric lamps were all alight. Istopped at the group of people.“What news from the common?” said I.There were two men and a woman at the gate.“Eh?” said one of the men, turning.“What news from the common?” I said.“Ain’t yer just _been_ there?” asked the men.“People seem fair silly about the common,” said the woman over thegate. “What’s it all abart?”“Haven’t you heard of the men from Mars?” said I; “the creatures fromMars?”“Quite enough,” said the woman over the gate. “Thenks”; and all threeof them laughed.I felt foolish and angry. I tried and found I could not tell them whatI had seen. They laughed again at my broken sentences.“You’ll hear more yet,” I said, and went on to my home.I startled my wife at the doorway, so haggard was I. I went into thedining room, sat down, drank some wine, and so soon as I could collectmyself sufficiently I told her the things I had seen. The dinner, whichwas a cold one, had already been served, and remained neglected on thetable while I told my story.“There is one thing,” I said, to allay the fears I had aroused; “theyare the most sluggish things I ever saw crawl. They may keep the pitand kill people who come near them, but they cannot get out of it. . .. But the horror of them!”“Don’t, dear!” said my wife, knitting her brows and putting her hand onmine.“Poor Ogilvy!” I said. “To think he may be lying dead there!”My wife at least did not find my experience incredible. When I saw howdeadly white her face was, I ceased abruptly.“They may come here,” she said again and again.I pressed her to take wine, and tried to reassure her.“They can scarcely move,” I said.I began to comfort her and myself by repeating all that Ogilvy had toldme of the impossibility of the Martians establishing themselves on theearth. In particular I laid stress on the gravitational difficulty. Onthe surface of the earth the force of gravity is three times what it ison the surface of Mars. A Martian, therefore, would weigh three timesmore than on Mars, albeit his muscular strength would be the same. Hisown body would be a cope of lead to him, therefore. That, indeed, wasthe general opinion. Both _The Times_ and the _Daily Telegraph_, forinstance, insisted on it the next morning, and both overlooked, just asI did, two obvious modifying influences.The atmosphere of the earth, we now know, contains far more oxygen orfar less argon (whichever way one likes to put it) than does Mars’. Theinvigorating influences of this excess of oxygen upon the Martiansindisputably did much to counterbalance the increased weight of theirbodies. And, in the second place, we all overlooked the fact that suchmechanical intelligence as the Martian possessed was quite able todispense with muscular exertion at a pinch.But I did not consider these points at the time, and so my reasoningwas dead against the chances of the invaders. With wine and food, theconfidence of my own table, and the necessity of reassuring my wife, Igrew by insensible degrees courageous and secure.“They have done a foolish thing,” said I, fingering my wineglass. “Theyare dangerous because, no doubt, they are mad with terror. Perhaps theyexpected to find no living things—certainly no intelligent livingthings.”“A shell in the pit,” said I, “if the worst comes to the worst, willkill them all.”The intense excitement of the events had no doubt left my perceptivepowers in a state of erethism. I remember that dinner table withextraordinary vividness even now. My dear wife’s sweet anxious facepeering at me from under the pink lamp shade, the white cloth with itssilver and glass table furniture—for in those days even philosophicalwriters had many little luxuries—the crimson-purple wine in my glass,are photographically distinct. At the end of it I sat, tempering nutswith a cigarette, regretting Ogilvy’s rashness, and denouncing theshort-sighted timidity of the Martians.So some respectable dodo in the Mauritius might have lorded it in hisnest, and discussed the arrival of that shipful of pitiless sailors inwant of animal food. “We will peck them to death tomorrow, my dear.”I did not know it, but that was the last civilised dinner I was to eatfor very many strange and terrible days.VIII.FRIDAY NIGHT.The most extraordinary thing to my mind, of all the strange andwonderful things that happened upon that Friday, was the dovetailing ofthe commonplace habits of our social order with the first beginnings ofthe series of events that was to topple that social order headlong. Ifon Friday night you had taken a pair of compasses and drawn a circlewith a radius of five miles round the Woking sand-pits, I doubt if youwould have had one human being outside it, unless it were some relationof Stent or of the three or four cyclists or London people lying deadon the common, whose emotions or habits were at all affected by thenew-comers. Many people had heard of the cylinder, of course, andtalked about it in their leisure, but it certainly did not make thesensation that an ultimatum to Germany would have done.In London that night poor Henderson’s telegram describing the gradualunscrewing of the shot was judged to be a canard, and his eveningpaper, after wiring for authentication from him and receiving noreply—the man was killed—decided not to print a special edition.Even within the five-mile circle the great majority of people wereinert. I have already described the behaviour of the men and women towhom I spoke. All over the district people were dining and supping;working men were gardening after the labours of the day, children werebeing put to bed, young people were wandering through the laneslove-making, students sat over their books.Maybe there was a murmur in the village streets, a novel and dominanttopic in the public-houses, and here and there a messenger, or even aneye-witness of the later occurrences, caused a whirl of excitement, ashouting, and a running to and fro; but for the most part the dailyroutine of working, eating, drinking, sleeping, went on as it had donefor countless years—as though no planet Mars existed in the sky. Evenat Woking station and Horsell and Chobham that was the case.In Woking junction, until a late hour, trains were stopping and goingon, others were shunting on the sidings, passengers were alighting andwaiting, and everything was proceeding in the most ordinary way. A boyfrom the town, trenching on Smith’s monopoly, was selling papers withthe afternoon’s news. The ringing impact of trucks, the sharp whistleof the engines from the junction, mingled with their shouts of “Menfrom Mars!” Excited men came into the station about nine o’clock withincredible tidings, and caused no more disturbance than drunkards mighthave done. People rattling Londonwards peered into the darkness outsidethe carriage windows, and saw only a rare, flickering, vanishing sparkdance up from the direction of Horsell, a red glow and a thin veil ofsmoke driving across the stars, and thought that nothing more seriousthan a heath fire was happening. It was only round the edge of thecommon that any disturbance was perceptible. There were half a dozenvillas burning on the Woking border. There were lights in all thehouses on the common side of the three villages, and the people therekept awake till dawn.A curious crowd lingered restlessly, people coming and going but thecrowd remaining, both on the Chobham and Horsell bridges. One or twoadventurous souls, it was afterwards found, went into the darkness andcrawled quite near the Martians; but they never returned, for now andagain a light-ray, like the beam of a warship’s searchlight swept thecommon, and the Heat-Ray was ready to follow. Save for such, that bigarea of common was silent and desolate, and the charred bodies layabout on it all night under the stars, and all the next day. A noise ofhammering from the pit was heard by many people.So you have the state of things on Friday night. In the centre,sticking into the skin of our old planet Earth like a poisoned dart,was this cylinder. But the poison was scarcely working yet. Around itwas a patch of silent common, smouldering in places, and with a fewdark, dimly seen objects lying in contorted attitudes here and there.Here and there was a burning bush or tree. Beyond was a fringe ofexcitement, and farther than that fringe the inflammation had not creptas yet. In the rest of the world the stream of life still flowed as ithad flowed for immemorial years. The fever of war that would presentlyclog vein and artery, deaden nerve and destroy brain, had still todevelop.All night long the Martians were hammering and stirring, sleepless,indefatigable, at work upon the machines they were making ready, andever and again a puff of greenish-white smoke whirled up to the starlitsky.About eleven a company of soldiers came through Horsell, and deployedalong the edge of the common to form a cordon. Later a second companymarched through Chobham to deploy on the north side of the common.Several officers from the Inkerman barracks had been on the commonearlier in the day, and one, Major Eden, was reported to be missing.The colonel of the regiment came to the Chobham bridge and was busyquestioning the crowd at midnight. The military authorities werecertainly alive to the seriousness of the business. About eleven, thenext morning’s papers were able to say, a squadron of hussars, twoMaxims, and about four hundred men of the Cardigan regiment startedfrom Aldershot.A few seconds after midnight the crowd in the Chertsey road, Woking,saw a star fall from heaven into the pine woods to the northwest. Ithad a greenish colour, and caused a silent brightness like summerlightning. This was the second cylinder.IX.THE FIGHTING BEGINS.Saturday lives in my memory as a day of suspense. It was a day oflassitude too, hot and close, with, I am told, a rapidly fluctuatingbarometer. I had slept but little, though my wife had succeeded insleeping, and I rose early. I went into my garden before breakfast andstood listening, but towards the common there was nothing stirring buta lark.The milkman came as usual. I heard the rattle of his chariot and I wentround to the side gate to ask the latest news. He told me that duringthe night the Martians had been surrounded by troops, and that gunswere expected. Then—a familiar, reassuring note—I heard a train runningtowards Woking.“They aren’t to be killed,” said the milkman, “if that can possibly beavoided.”I saw my neighbour gardening, chatted with him for a time, and thenstrolled in to breakfast. It was a most unexceptional morning. Myneighbour was of opinion that the troops would be able to capture or todestroy the Martians during the day.“It’s a pity they make themselves so unapproachable,” he said. “Itwould be curious to know how they live on another planet; we mightlearn a thing or two.”He came up to the fence and extended a handful of strawberries, for hisgardening was as generous as it was enthusiastic. At the same time hetold me of the burning of the pine woods about the Byfleet Golf Links.“They say,” said he, “that there’s another of those blessed thingsfallen there—number two. But one’s enough, surely. This lot’ll cost theinsurance people a pretty penny before everything’s settled.” Helaughed with an air of the greatest good humour as he said this. Thewoods, he said, were still burning, and pointed out a haze of smoke tome. “They will be hot under foot for days, on account of the thick soilof pine needles and turf,” he said, and then grew serious over “poorOgilvy.”After breakfast, instead of working, I decided to walk down towards thecommon. Under the railway bridge I found a group of soldiers—sappers, Ithink, men in small round caps, dirty red jackets unbuttoned, andshowing their blue shirts, dark trousers, and boots coming to the calf.They told me no one was allowed over the canal, and, looking along theroad towards the bridge, I saw one of the Cardigan men standingsentinel there. I talked with these soldiers for a time; I told them ofmy sight of the Martians on the previous evening. None of them had seenthe Martians, and they had but the vaguest ideas of them, so that theyplied me with questions. They said that they did not know who hadauthorised the movements of the troops; their idea was that a disputehad arisen at the Horse Guards. The ordinary sapper is a great dealbetter educated than the common soldier, and they discussed thepeculiar conditions of the possible fight with some acuteness. Idescribed the Heat-Ray to them, and they began to argue amongthemselves.“Crawl up under cover and rush ’em, say I,” said one.“Get aht!” said another. “What’s cover against this ’ere ’eat? Sticksto cook yer! What we got to do is to go as near as the ground’ll letus, and then drive a trench.”“Blow yer trenches! You always want trenches; you ought to ha’ beenborn a rabbit Snippy.”“Ain’t they got any necks, then?” said a third, abruptly—a little,contemplative, dark man, smoking a pipe.I repeated my description.“Octopuses,” said he, “that’s what I calls ’em. Talk about fishers ofmen—fighters of fish it is this time!”“It ain’t no murder killing beasts like that,” said the first speaker.“Why not shell the darned things strite off and finish ’em?” said thelittle dark man. “You carn tell what they might do.”“Where’s your shells?” said the first speaker. “There ain’t no time. Doit in a rush, that’s my tip, and do it at once.”So they discussed it. After a while I left them, and went on to therailway station to get as many morning papers as I could.But I will not weary the reader with a description of that long morningand of the longer afternoon. I did not succeed in getting a glimpse ofthe common, for even Horsell and Chobham church towers were in thehands of the military authorities. The soldiers I addressed didn’t knowanything; the officers were mysterious as well as busy. I found peoplein the town quite secure again in the presence of the military, and Iheard for the first time from Marshall, the tobacconist, that his sonwas among the dead on the common. The soldiers had made the people onthe outskirts of Horsell lock up and leave their houses.I got back to lunch about two, very tired for, as I have said, the daywas extremely hot and dull; and in order to refresh myself I took acold bath in the afternoon. About half past four I went up to therailway station to get an evening paper, for the morning papers hadcontained only a very inaccurate description of the killing of Stent,Henderson, Ogilvy, and the others. But there was little I didn’t know.The Martians did not show an inch of themselves. They seemed busy intheir pit, and there was a sound of hammering and an almost continuousstreamer of smoke. Apparently they were busy getting ready for astruggle. “Fresh attempts have been made to signal, but withoutsuccess,” was the stereotyped formula of the papers. A sapper told meit was done by a man in a ditch with a flag on a long pole. TheMartians took as much notice of such advances as we should of thelowing of a cow.I must confess the sight of all this armament, all this preparation,greatly excited me. My imagination became belligerent, and defeated theinvaders in a dozen striking ways; something of my schoolboy dreams ofbattle and heroism came back. It hardly seemed a fair fight to me atthat time. They seemed very helpless in that pit of theirs.About three o’clock there began the thud of a gun at measured intervalsfrom Chertsey or Addlestone. I learned that the smouldering pine woodinto which the second cylinder had fallen was being shelled, in thehope of destroying that object before it opened. It was only aboutfive, however, that a field gun reached Chobham for use against thefirst body of Martians.About six in the evening, as I sat at tea with my wife in thesummerhouse talking vigorously about the battle that was lowering uponus, I heard a muffled detonation from the common, and immediately aftera gust of firing. Close on the heels of that came a violent rattlingcrash, quite close to us, that shook the ground; and, starting out uponthe lawn, I saw the tops of the trees about the Oriental College burstinto smoky red flame, and the tower of the little church beside itslide down into ruin. The pinnacle of the mosque had vanished, and theroof line of the college itself looked as if a hundred-ton gun had beenat work upon it. One of our chimneys cracked as if a shot had hit it,flew, and a piece of it came clattering down the tiles and made a heapof broken red fragments upon the flower bed by my study window.I and my wife stood amazed. Then I realised that the crest of MayburyHill must be within range of the Martians’ Heat-Ray now that thecollege was cleared out of the way.At that I gripped my wife’s arm, and without ceremony ran her out intothe road. Then I fetched out the servant, telling her I would goupstairs myself for the box she was clamouring for.“We can’t possibly stay here,” I said; and as I spoke the firingreopened for a moment upon the common.“But where are we to go?” said my wife in terror.I thought perplexed. Then I remembered her cousins at Leatherhead.“Leatherhead!” I shouted above the sudden noise.She looked away from me downhill. The people were coming out of theirhouses, astonished.“How are we to get to Leatherhead?” she said.Down the hill I saw a bevy of hussars ride under the railway bridge;three galloped through the open gates of the Oriental College; twoothers dismounted, and began running from house to house. The sun,shining through the smoke that drove up from the tops of the trees,seemed blood red, and threw an unfamiliar lurid light upon everything.“Stop here,” said I; “you are safe here”; and I started off at once forthe Spotted Dog, for I knew the landlord had a horse and dog cart. Iran, for I perceived that in a moment everyone upon this side of thehill would be moving. I found him in his bar, quite unaware of what wasgoing on behind his house. A man stood with his back to me, talking tohim.“I must have a pound,” said the landlord, “and I’ve no one to driveit.”“I’ll give you two,” said I, over the stranger’s shoulder.“What for?”“And I’ll bring it back by midnight,” I said.“Lord!” said the landlord; “what’s the hurry? I’m selling my bit of apig. Two pounds, and you bring it back? What’s going on now?”I explained hastily that I had to leave my home, and so secured the dogcart. At the time it did not seem to me nearly so urgent that thelandlord should leave his. I took care to have the cart there and then,drove it off down the road, and, leaving it in charge of my wife andservant, rushed into my house and packed a few valuables, such plate aswe had, and so forth. The beech trees below the house were burningwhile I did this, and the palings up the road glowed red. While I wasoccupied in this way, one of the dismounted hussars came running up. Hewas going from house to house, warning people to leave. He was going onas I came out of my front door, lugging my treasures, done up in atablecloth. I shouted after him:“What news?”He turned, stared, bawled something about “crawling out in a thing likea dish cover,” and ran on to the gate of the house at the crest. Asudden whirl of black smoke driving across the road hid him for amoment. I ran to my neighbour’s door and rapped to satisfy myself ofwhat I already knew, that his wife had gone to London with him and hadlocked up their house. I went in again, according to my promise, to getmy servant’s box, lugged it out, clapped it beside her on the tail ofthe dog cart, and then caught the reins and jumped up into the driver’sseat beside my wife. In another moment we were clear of the smoke andnoise, and spanking down the opposite slope of Maybury Hill towards OldWoking.In front was a quiet sunny landscape, a wheat field ahead on eitherside of the road, and the Maybury Inn with its swinging sign. I saw thedoctor’s cart ahead of me. At the bottom of the hill I turned my headto look at the hillside I was leaving. Thick streamers of black smokeshot with threads of red fire were driving up into the still air, andthrowing dark shadows upon the green treetops eastward. The smokealready extended far away to the east and west—to the Byfleet pinewoods eastward, and to Woking on the west. The road was dotted withpeople running towards us. And very faint now, but very distinctthrough the hot, quiet air, one heard the whirr of a machine-gun thatwas presently stilled, and an intermittent cracking of rifles.Apparently the Martians were setting fire to everything within range oftheir Heat-Ray.I am not an expert driver, and I had immediately to turn my attentionto the horse. When I looked back again the second hill had hidden theblack smoke. I slashed the horse with the whip, and gave him a looserein until Woking and Send lay between us and that quivering tumult. Iovertook and passed the doctor between Woking and Send.X.IN THE STORM.Leatherhead is about twelve miles from Maybury Hill. The scent of haywas in the air through the lush meadows beyond Pyrford, and the hedgeson either side were sweet and gay with multitudes of dog-roses. Theheavy firing that had broken out while we were driving down MayburyHill ceased as abruptly as it began, leaving the evening very peacefuland still. We got to Leatherhead without misadventure about nineo’clock, and the horse had an hour’s rest while I took supper with mycousins and commended my wife to their care.My wife was curiously silent throughout the drive, and seemed oppressedwith forebodings of evil. I talked to her reassuringly, pointing outthat the Martians were tied to the pit by sheer heaviness, and at theutmost could but crawl a little out of it; but she answered only inmonosyllables. Had it not been for my promise to the innkeeper, shewould, I think, have urged me to stay in Leatherhead that night. Wouldthat I had! Her face, I remember, was very white as we parted.For my own part, I had been feverishly excited all day. Something verylike the war fever that occasionally runs through a civilised communityhad got into my blood, and in my heart I was not so very sorry that Ihad to return to Maybury that night. I was even afraid that that lastfusillade I had heard might mean the extermination of our invaders fromMars. I can best express my state of mind by saying that I wanted to bein at the death.It was nearly eleven when I started to return. The night wasunexpectedly dark; to me, walking out of the lighted passage of mycousins’ house, it seemed indeed black, and it was as hot and close asthe day. Overhead the clouds were driving fast, albeit not a breathstirred the shrubs about us. My cousins’ man lit both lamps. Happily, Iknew the road intimately. My wife stood in the light of the doorway,and watched me until I jumped up into the dog cart. Then abruptly sheturned and went in, leaving my cousins side by side wishing me goodhap.I was a little depressed at first with the contagion of my wife’sfears, but very soon my thoughts reverted to the Martians. At that timeI was absolutely in the dark as to the course of the evening’sfighting. I did not know even the circumstances that had precipitatedthe conflict. As I came through Ockham (for that was the way Ireturned, and not through Send and Old Woking) I saw along the westernhorizon a blood-red glow, which as I drew nearer, crept slowly up thesky. The driving clouds of the gathering thunderstorm mingled therewith masses of black and red smoke.Ripley Street was deserted, and except for a lighted window or so thevillage showed not a sign of life; but I narrowly escaped an accidentat the corner of the road to Pyrford, where a knot of people stood withtheir backs to me. They said nothing to me as I passed. I do not knowwhat they knew of the things happening beyond the hill, nor do I knowif the silent houses I passed on my way were sleeping securely, ordeserted and empty, or harassed and watching against the terror of thenight.From Ripley until I came through Pyrford I was in the valley of theWey, and the red glare was hidden from me. As I ascended the littlehill beyond Pyrford Church the glare came into view again, and thetrees about me shivered with the first intimation of the storm that wasupon me. Then I heard midnight pealing out from Pyrford Church behindme, and then came the silhouette of Maybury Hill, with its tree-topsand roofs black and sharp against the red.Even as I beheld this a lurid green glare lit the road about me andshowed the distant woods towards Addlestone. I felt a tug at the reins.I saw that the driving clouds had been pierced as it were by a threadof green fire, suddenly lighting their confusion and falling into thefield to my left. It was the third falling star!Close on its apparition, and blindingly violet by contrast, danced outthe first lightning of the gathering storm, and the thunder burst likea rocket overhead. The horse took the bit between his teeth and bolted.A moderate incline runs towards the foot of Maybury Hill, and down thiswe clattered. Once the lightning had begun, it went on in as rapid asuccession of flashes as I have ever seen. The thunderclaps, treadingone on the heels of another and with a strange crackling accompaniment,sounded more like the working of a gigantic electric machine than theusual detonating reverberations. The flickering light was blinding andconfusing, and a thin hail smote gustily at my face as I drove down theslope.At first I regarded little but the road before me, and then abruptly myattention was arrested by something that was moving rapidly down theopposite slope of Maybury Hill. At first I took it for the wet roof ofa house, but one flash following another showed it to be in swiftrolling movement. It was an elusive vision—a moment of bewilderingdarkness, and then, in a flash like daylight, the red masses of theOrphanage near the crest of the hill, the green tops of the pine trees,and this problematical object came out clear and sharp and bright.And this Thing I saw! How can I describe it? A monstrous tripod, higherthan many houses, striding over the young pine trees, and smashing themaside in its career; a walking engine of glittering metal, striding nowacross the heather; articulate ropes of steel dangling from it, and theclattering tumult of its passage mingling with the riot of the thunder.A flash, and it came out vividly, heeling over one way with two feet inthe air, to vanish and reappear almost instantly as it seemed, with thenext flash, a hundred yards nearer. Can you imagine a milking stooltilted and bowled violently along the ground? That was the impressionthose instant flashes gave. But instead of a milking stool imagine it agreat body of machinery on a tripod stand.Then suddenly the trees in the pine wood ahead of me were parted, asbrittle reeds are parted by a man thrusting through them; they weresnapped off and driven headlong, and a second huge tripod appeared,rushing, as it seemed, headlong towards me. And I was galloping hard tomeet it! At the sight of the second monster my nerve went altogether.Not stopping to look again, I wrenched the horse’s head hard round tothe right and in another moment the dog cart had heeled over upon thehorse; the shafts smashed noisily, and I was flung sideways and fellheavily into a shallow pool of water.I crawled out almost immediately, and crouched, my feet still in thewater, under a clump of furze. The horse lay motionless (his neck wasbroken, poor brute!) and by the lightning flashes I saw the black bulkof the overturned dog cart and the silhouette of the wheel stillspinning slowly. In another moment the colossal mechanism went stridingby me, and passed uphill towards Pyrford.Seen nearer, the Thing was incredibly strange, for it was no mereinsensate machine driving on its way. Machine it was, with a ringingmetallic pace, and long, flexible, glittering tentacles (one of whichgripped a young pine tree) swinging and rattling about its strangebody. It picked its road as it went striding along, and the brazen hoodthat surmounted it moved to and fro with the inevitable suggestion of ahead looking about. Behind the main body was a huge mass of white metallike a gigantic fisherman’s basket, and puffs of green smoke squirtedout from the joints of the limbs as the monster swept by me. And in aninstant it was gone.So much I saw then, all vaguely for the flickering of the lightning, inblinding highlights and dense black shadows.As it passed it set up an exultant deafening howl that drowned thethunder—“Aloo! Aloo!”—and in another minute it was with its companion,half a mile away, stooping over something in the field. I have no doubtthis Thing in the field was the third of the ten cylinders they hadfired at us from Mars.For some minutes I lay there in the rain and darkness watching, by theintermittent light, these monstrous beings of metal moving about in thedistance over the hedge tops. A thin hail was now beginning, and as itcame and went their figures grew misty and then flashed into clearnessagain. Now and then came a gap in the lightning, and the nightswallowed them up.I was soaked with hail above and puddle water below. It was some timebefore my blank astonishment would let me struggle up the bank to adrier position, or think at all of my imminent peril.Not far from me was a little one-roomed squatter’s hut of wood,surrounded by a patch of potato garden. I struggled to my feet at last,and, crouching and making use of every chance of cover, I made a runfor this. I hammered at the door, but I could not make the people hear(if there were any people inside), and after a time I desisted, and,availing myself of a ditch for the greater part of the way, succeededin crawling, unobserved by these monstrous machines, into the pinewoods towards Maybury.Under cover of this I pushed on, wet and shivering now, towards my ownhouse. I walked among the trees trying to find the footpath. It wasvery dark indeed in the wood, for the lightning was now becominginfrequent, and the hail, which was pouring down in a torrent, fell incolumns through the gaps in the heavy foliage.If I had fully realised the meaning of all the things I had seen Ishould have immediately worked my way round through Byfleet to StreetCobham, and so gone back to rejoin my wife at Leatherhead. But thatnight the strangeness of things about me, and my physical wretchedness,prevented me, for I was bruised, weary, wet to the skin, deafened andblinded by the storm.I had a vague idea of going on to my own house, and that was as muchmotive as I had. I staggered through the trees, fell into a ditch andbruised my knees against a plank, and finally splashed out into thelane that ran down from the College Arms. I say splashed, for the stormwater was sweeping the sand down the hill in a muddy torrent. There inthe darkness a man blundered into me and sent me reeling back.He gave a cry of terror, sprang sideways, and rushed on before I couldgather my wits sufficiently to speak to him. So heavy was the stress ofthe storm just at this place that I had the hardest task to win my wayup the hill. I went close up to the fence on the left and worked my wayalong its palings.Near the top I stumbled upon something soft, and, by a flash oflightning, saw between my feet a heap of black broadcloth and a pair ofboots. Before I could distinguish clearly how the man lay, the flickerof light had passed. I stood over him waiting for the next flash. Whenit came, I saw that he was a sturdy man, cheaply but not shabbilydressed; his head was bent under his body, and he lay crumpled up closeto the fence, as though he had been flung violently against it.Overcoming the repugnance natural to one who had never before touched adead body, I stooped and turned him over to feel for his heart. He wasquite dead. Apparently his neck had been broken. The lightning flashedfor a third time, and his face leaped upon me. I sprang to my feet. Itwas the landlord of the Spotted Dog, whose conveyance I had taken.I stepped over him gingerly and pushed on up the hill. I made my way bythe police station and the College Arms towards my own house. Nothingwas burning on the hillside, though from the common there still came ared glare and a rolling tumult of ruddy smoke beating up against thedrenching hail. So far as I could see by the flashes, the houses aboutme were mostly uninjured. By the College Arms a dark heap lay in theroad.Down the road towards Maybury Bridge there were voices and the sound offeet, but I had not the courage to shout or to go to them. I let myselfin with my latchkey, closed, locked and bolted the door, staggered tothe foot of the staircase, and sat down. My imagination was full ofthose striding metallic monsters, and of the dead body smashed againstthe fence.I crouched at the foot of the staircase with my back to the wall,shivering violently.XI.AT THE WINDOW.I have already said that my storms of emotion have a trick ofexhausting themselves. After a time I discovered that I was cold andwet, and with little pools of water about me on the stair carpet. I gotup almost mechanically, went into the dining room and drank somewhisky, and then I was moved to change my clothes.After I had done that I went upstairs to my study, but why I did so Ido not know. The window of my study looks over the trees and therailway towards Horsell Common. In the hurry of our departure thiswindow had been left open. The passage was dark, and, by contrast withthe picture the window frame enclosed, the side of the room seemedimpenetrably dark. I stopped short in the doorway.The thunderstorm had passed. The towers of the Oriental College and thepine trees about it had gone, and very far away, lit by a vivid redglare, the common about the sand-pits was visible. Across the lighthuge black shapes, grotesque and strange, moved busily to and fro.It seemed indeed as if the whole country in that direction was onfire—a broad hillside set with minute tongues of flame, swaying andwrithing with the gusts of the dying storm, and throwing a redreflection upon the cloud scud above. Every now and then a haze ofsmoke from some nearer conflagration drove across the window and hidthe Martian shapes. I could not see what they were doing, nor the clearform of them, nor recognise the black objects they were busied upon.Neither could I see the nearer fire, though the reflections of itdanced on the wall and ceiling of the study. A sharp, resinous tang ofburning was in the air.I closed the door noiselessly and crept towards the window. As I didso, the view opened out until, on the one hand, it reached to thehouses about Woking station, and on the other to the charred andblackened pine woods of Byfleet. There was a light down below the hill,on the railway, near the arch, and several of the houses along theMaybury road and the streets near the station were glowing ruins. Thelight upon the railway puzzled me at first; there were a black heap anda vivid glare, and to the right of that a row of yellow oblongs. Then Iperceived this was a wrecked train, the fore part smashed and on fire,the hinder carriages still upon the rails.Between these three main centres of light—the houses, the train, andthe burning county towards Chobham—stretched irregular patches of darkcountry, broken here and there by intervals of dimly glowing andsmoking ground. It was the strangest spectacle, that black expanse setwith fire. It reminded me, more than anything else, of the Potteries atnight. At first I could distinguish no people at all, though I peeredintently for them. Later I saw against the light of Woking station anumber of black figures hurrying one after the other across the line.And this was the little world in which I had been living securely foryears, this fiery chaos! What had happened in the last seven hours Istill did not know; nor did I know, though I was beginning to guess,the relation between these mechanical colossi and the sluggish lumps Ihad seen disgorged from the cylinder. With a queer feeling ofimpersonal interest I turned my desk chair to the window, sat down, andstared at the blackened country, and particularly at the three giganticblack things that were going to and fro in the glare about thesand-pits.They seemed amazingly busy. I began to ask myself what they could be.Were they intelligent mechanisms? Such a thing I felt was impossible.Or did a Martian sit within each, ruling, directing, using, much as aman’s brain sits and rules in his body? I began to compare the thingsto human machines, to ask myself for the first time in my life how anironclad or a steam engine would seem to an intelligent lower animal.The storm had left the sky clear, and over the smoke of the burningland the little fading pinpoint of Mars was dropping into the west,when a soldier came into my garden. I heard a slight scraping at thefence, and rousing myself from the lethargy that had fallen upon me, Ilooked down and saw him dimly, clambering over the palings. At thesight of another human being my torpor passed, and I leaned out of thewindow eagerly.“Hist!” said I, in a whisper.He stopped astride of the fence in doubt. Then he came over and acrossthe lawn to the corner of the house. He bent down and stepped softly.“Who’s there?” he said, also whispering, standing under the window andpeering up.“Where are you going?” I asked.“God knows.”“Are you trying to hide?”“That’s it.”“Come into the house,” I said.I went down, unfastened the door, and let him in, and locked the dooragain. I could not see his face. He was hatless, and his coat wasunbuttoned.“My God!” he said, as I drew him in.“What has happened?” I asked.“What hasn’t?” In the obscurity I could see he made a gesture ofdespair. “They wiped us out—simply wiped us out,” he repeated again andagain.He followed me, almost mechanically, into the dining room.“Take some whisky,” I said, pouring out a stiff dose.He drank it. Then abruptly he sat down before the table, put his headon his arms, and began to sob and weep like a little boy, in a perfectpassion of emotion, while I, with a curious forgetfulness of my ownrecent despair, stood beside him, wondering.It was a long time before he could steady his nerves to answer myquestions, and then he answered perplexingly and brokenly. He was adriver in the artillery, and had only come into action about seven. Atthat time firing was going on across the common, and it was said thefirst party of Martians were crawling slowly towards their secondcylinder under cover of a metal shield.Later this shield staggered up on tripod legs and became the first ofthe fighting-machines I had seen. The gun he drove had been unlimberednear Horsell, in order to command the sand-pits, and its arrival it wasthat had precipitated the action. As the limber gunners went to therear, his horse trod in a rabbit hole and came down, throwing him intoa depression of the ground. At the same moment the gun exploded behindhim, the ammunition blew up, there was fire all about him, and he foundhimself lying under a heap of charred dead men and dead horses.“I lay still,” he said, “scared out of my wits, with the fore quarterof a horse atop of me. We’d been wiped out. And the smell—good God!Like burnt meat! I was hurt across the back by the fall of the horse,and there I had to lie until I felt better. Just like parade it hadbeen a minute before—then stumble, bang, swish!”“Wiped out!” he said.He had hid under the dead horse for a long time, peeping out furtivelyacross the common. The Cardigan men had tried a rush, in skirmishingorder, at the pit, simply to be swept out of existence. Then themonster had risen to its feet and had begun to walk leisurely to andfro across the common among the few fugitives, with its headlike hoodturning about exactly like the head of a cowled human being. A kind ofarm carried a complicated metallic case, about which green flashesscintillated, and out of the funnel of this there smoked the Heat-Ray.In a few minutes there was, so far as the soldier could see, not aliving thing left upon the common, and every bush and tree upon it thatwas not already a blackened skeleton was burning. The hussars had beenon the road beyond the curvature of the ground, and he saw nothing ofthem. He heard the Maxims rattle for a time and then become still. Thegiant saved Woking station and its cluster of houses until the last;then in a moment the Heat-Ray was brought to bear, and the town becamea heap of fiery ruins. Then the Thing shut off the Heat-Ray, andturning its back upon the artilleryman, began to waddle away towardsthe smouldering pine woods that sheltered the second cylinder. As itdid so a second glittering Titan built itself up out of the pit.The second monster followed the first, and at that the artillerymanbegan to crawl very cautiously across the hot heather ash towardsHorsell. He managed to get alive into the ditch by the side of theroad, and so escaped to Woking. There his story became ejaculatory. Theplace was impassable. It seems there were a few people alive there,frantic for the most part and many burned and scalded. He was turnedaside by the fire, and hid among some almost scorching heaps of brokenwall as one of the Martian giants returned. He saw this one pursue aman, catch him up in one of its steely tentacles, and knock his headagainst the trunk of a pine tree. At last, after nightfall, theartilleryman made a rush for it and got over the railway embankment.Since then he had been skulking along towards Maybury, in the hope ofgetting out of danger Londonward. People were hiding in trenches andcellars, and many of the survivors had made off towards Woking villageand Send. He had been consumed with thirst until he found one of thewater mains near the railway arch smashed, and the water bubbling outlike a spring upon the road.That was the story I got from him, bit by bit. He grew calmer tellingme and trying to make me see the things he had seen. He had eaten nofood since midday, he told me early in his narrative, and I found somemutton and bread in the pantry and brought it into the room. We lit nolamp for fear of attracting the Martians, and ever and again our handswould touch upon bread or meat. As he talked, things about us camedarkly out of the darkness, and the trampled bushes and broken rosetrees outside the window grew distinct. It would seem that a number ofmen or animals had rushed across the lawn. I began to see his face,blackened and haggard, as no doubt mine was also.When we had finished eating we went softly upstairs to my study, and Ilooked again out of the open window. In one night the valley had becomea valley of ashes. The fires had dwindled now. Where flames had beenthere were now streamers of smoke; but the countless ruins of shatteredand gutted houses and blasted and blackened trees that the night hadhidden stood out now gaunt and terrible in the pitiless light of dawn.Yet here and there some object had had the luck to escape—a whiterailway signal here, the end of a greenhouse there, white and freshamid the wreckage. Never before in the history of warfare haddestruction been so indiscriminate and so universal. And shining withthe growing light of the east, three of the metallic giants stood aboutthe pit, their cowls rotating as though they were surveying thedesolation they had made.It seemed to me that the pit had been enlarged, and ever and againpuffs of vivid green vapour streamed up and out of it towards thebrightening dawn—streamed up, whirled, broke, and vanished.Beyond were the pillars of fire about Chobham. They became pillars ofbloodshot smoke at the first touch of day.XII.WHAT I SAW OF THE DESTRUCTION OF WEYBRIDGE AND SHEPPERTON.As the dawn grew brighter we withdrew from the window from which we hadwatched the Martians, and went very quietly downstairs.The artilleryman agreed with me that the house was no place to stay in.He proposed, he said, to make his way Londonward, and thence rejoin hisbattery—No. 12, of the Horse Artillery. My plan was to return at onceto Leatherhead; and so greatly had the strength of the Martiansimpressed me that I had determined to take my wife to Newhaven, and gowith her out of the country forthwith. For I already perceived clearlythat the country about London must inevitably be the scene of adisastrous struggle before such creatures as these could be destroyed.Between us and Leatherhead, however, lay the third cylinder, with itsguarding giants. Had I been alone, I think I should have taken mychance and struck across country. But the artilleryman dissuaded me:“It’s no kindness to the right sort of wife,” he said, “to make her awidow”; and in the end I agreed to go with him, under cover of thewoods, northward as far as Street Cobham before I parted with him.Thence I would make a big detour by Epsom to reach Leatherhead.I should have started at once, but my companion had been in activeservice and he knew better than that. He made me ransack the house fora flask, which he filled with whisky; and we lined every availablepocket with packets of biscuits and slices of meat. Then we crept outof the house, and ran as quickly as we could down the ill-made road bywhich I had come overnight. The houses seemed deserted. In the road laya group of three charred bodies close together, struck dead by theHeat-Ray; and here and there were things that people had dropped—aclock, a slipper, a silver spoon, and the like poor valuables. At thecorner turning up towards the post office a little cart, filled withboxes and furniture, and horseless, heeled over on a broken wheel. Acash box had been hastily smashed open and thrown under the debris.Except the lodge at the Orphanage, which was still on fire, none of thehouses had suffered very greatly here. The Heat-Ray had shaved thechimney tops and passed. Yet, save ourselves, there did not seem to bea living soul on Maybury Hill. The majority of the inhabitants hadescaped, I suppose, by way of the Old Woking road—the road I had takenwhen I drove to Leatherhead—or they had hidden.We went down the lane, by the body of the man in black, sodden now fromthe overnight hail, and broke into the woods at the foot of the hill.We pushed through these towards the railway without meeting a soul. Thewoods across the line were but the scarred and blackened ruins ofwoods; for the most part the trees had fallen, but a certain proportionstill stood, dismal grey stems, with dark brown foliage instead ofgreen.On our side the fire had done no more than scorch the nearer trees; ithad failed to secure its footing. In one place the woodmen had been atwork on Saturday; trees, felled and freshly trimmed, lay in a clearing,with heaps of sawdust by the sawing-machine and its engine. Hard by wasa temporary hut, deserted. There was not a breath of wind this morning,and everything was strangely still. Even the birds were hushed, and aswe hurried along I and the artilleryman talked in whispers and lookednow and again over our shoulders. Once or twice we stopped to listen.After a time we drew near the road, and as we did so we heard theclatter of hoofs and saw through the tree stems three cavalry soldiersriding slowly towards Woking. We hailed them, and they halted while wehurried towards them. It was a lieutenant and a couple of privates ofthe 8th Hussars, with a stand like a theodolite, which the artillerymantold me was a heliograph.“You are the first men I’ve seen coming this way this morning,” saidthe lieutenant. “What’s brewing?”His voice and face were eager. The men behind him stared curiously. Theartilleryman jumped down the bank into the road and saluted.“Gun destroyed last night, sir. Have been hiding. Trying to rejoinbattery, sir. You’ll come in sight of the Martians, I expect, abouthalf a mile along this road.”“What the dickens are they like?” asked the lieutenant.“Giants in armour, sir. Hundred feet high. Three legs and a body like’luminium, with a mighty great head in a hood, sir.”“Get out!” said the lieutenant. “What confounded nonsense!”“You’ll see, sir. They carry a kind of box, sir, that shoots fire andstrikes you dead.”“What d’ye mean—a gun?”“No, sir,” and the artilleryman began a vivid account of the Heat-Ray.Halfway through, the lieutenant interrupted him and looked up at me. Iwas still standing on the bank by the side of the road.“It’s perfectly true,” I said.“Well,” said the lieutenant, “I suppose it’s my business to see it too.Look here”—to the artilleryman—“we’re detailed here clearing people outof their houses. You’d better go along and report yourself toBrigadier-General Marvin, and tell him all you know. He’s at Weybridge.Know the way?”“I do,” I said; and he turned his horse southward again.“Half a mile, you say?” said he.“At most,” I answered, and pointed over the treetops southward. Hethanked me and rode on, and we saw them no more.Farther along we came upon a group of three women and two children inthe road, busy clearing out a labourer’s cottage. They had got hold ofa little hand truck, and were piling it up with unclean-looking bundlesand shabby furniture. They were all too assiduously engaged to talk tous as we passed.By Byfleet station we emerged from the pine trees, and found thecountry calm and peaceful under the morning sunlight. We were farbeyond the range of the Heat-Ray there, and had it not been for thesilent desertion of some of the houses, the stirring movement ofpacking in others, and the knot of soldiers standing on the bridge overthe railway and staring down the line towards Woking, the day wouldhave seemed very like any other Sunday.Several farm waggons and carts were moving creakily along the road toAddlestone, and suddenly through the gate of a field we saw, across astretch of flat meadow, six twelve-pounders standing neatly at equaldistances pointing towards Woking. The gunners stood by the gunswaiting, and the ammunition waggons were at a business-like distance.The men stood almost as if under inspection.“That’s good!” said I. “They will get one fair shot, at any rate.”The artilleryman hesitated at the gate.“I shall go on,” he said.Farther on towards Weybridge, just over the bridge, there were a numberof men in white fatigue jackets throwing up a long rampart, and moreguns behind.“It’s bows and arrows against the lightning, anyhow,” said theartilleryman. “They ’aven’t seen that fire-beam yet.”The officers who were not actively engaged stood and stared over thetreetops southwestward, and the men digging would stop every now andagain to stare in the same direction.Byfleet was in a tumult; people packing, and a score of hussars, someof them dismounted, some on horseback, were hunting them about. Threeor four black government waggons, with crosses in white circles, and anold omnibus, among other vehicles, were being loaded in the villagestreet. There were scores of people, most of them sufficientlysabbatical to have assumed their best clothes. The soldiers were havingthe greatest difficulty in making them realise the gravity of theirposition. We saw one shrivelled old fellow with a huge box and a scoreor more of flower pots containing orchids, angrily expostulating withthe corporal who would leave them behind. I stopped and gripped hisarm.“Do you know what’s over there?” I said, pointing at the pine tops thathid the Martians.“Eh?” said he, turning. “I was explainin’ these is vallyble.”“Death!” I shouted. “Death is coming! Death!” and leaving him to digestthat if he could, I hurried on after the artillery-man. At the corner Ilooked back. The soldier had left him, and he was still standing by hisbox, with the pots of orchids on the lid of it, and staring vaguelyover the trees.No one in Weybridge could tell us where the headquarters wereestablished; the whole place was in such confusion as I had never seenin any town before. Carts, carriages everywhere, the most astonishingmiscellany of conveyances and horseflesh. The respectable inhabitantsof the place, men in golf and boating costumes, wives prettily dressed,were packing, river-side loafers energetically helping, childrenexcited, and, for the most part, highly delighted at this astonishingvariation of their Sunday experiences. In the midst of it all theworthy vicar was very pluckily holding an early celebration, and hisbell was jangling out above the excitement.I and the artilleryman, seated on the step of the drinking fountain,made a very passable meal upon what we had brought with us. Patrols ofsoldiers—here no longer hussars, but grenadiers in white—were warningpeople to move now or to take refuge in their cellars as soon as thefiring began. We saw as we crossed the railway bridge that a growingcrowd of people had assembled in and about the railway station, and theswarming platform was piled with boxes and packages. The ordinarytraffic had been stopped, I believe, in order to allow of the passageof troops and guns to Chertsey, and I have heard since that a savagestruggle occurred for places in the special trains that were put on ata later hour.We remained at Weybridge until midday, and at that hour we foundourselves at the place near Shepperton Lock where the Wey and Thamesjoin. Part of the time we spent helping two old women to pack a littlecart. The Wey has a treble mouth, and at this point boats are to behired, and there was a ferry across the river. On the Shepperton sidewas an inn with a lawn, and beyond that the tower of SheppertonChurch—it has been replaced by a spire—rose above the trees.Here we found an excited and noisy crowd of fugitives. As yet theflight had not grown to a panic, but there were already far more peoplethan all the boats going to and fro could enable to cross. People camepanting along under heavy burdens; one husband and wife were evencarrying a small outhouse door between them, with some of theirhousehold goods piled thereon. One man told us he meant to try to getaway from Shepperton station.There was a lot of shouting, and one man was even jesting. The ideapeople seemed to have here was that the Martians were simply formidablehuman beings, who might attack and sack the town, to be certainlydestroyed in the end. Every now and then people would glance nervouslyacross the Wey, at the meadows towards Chertsey, but everything overthere was still.Across the Thames, except just where the boats landed, everything wasquiet, in vivid contrast with the Surrey side. The people who landedthere from the boats went tramping off down the lane. The big ferryboathad just made a journey. Three or four soldiers stood on the lawn ofthe inn, staring and jesting at the fugitives, without offering tohelp. The inn was closed, as it was now within prohibited hours.“What’s that?” cried a boatman, and “Shut up, you fool!” said a mannear me to a yelping dog. Then the sound came again, this time from thedirection of Chertsey, a muffled thud—the sound of a gun.The fighting was beginning. Almost immediately unseen batteries acrossthe river to our right, unseen because of the trees, took up thechorus, firing heavily one after the other. A woman screamed. Everyonestood arrested by the sudden stir of battle, near us and yet invisibleto us. Nothing was to be seen save flat meadows, cows feedingunconcernedly for the most part, and silvery pollard willows motionlessin the warm sunlight.“The sojers’ll stop ’em,” said a woman beside me, doubtfully. Ahaziness rose over the treetops.Then suddenly we saw a rush of smoke far away up the river, a puff ofsmoke that jerked up into the air and hung; and forthwith the groundheaved under foot and a heavy explosion shook the air, smashing two orthree windows in the houses near, and leaving us astonished.“Here they are!” shouted a man in a blue jersey. “Yonder! D’yer seethem? Yonder!”Quickly, one after the other, one, two, three, four of the armouredMartians appeared, far away over the little trees, across the flatmeadows that stretched towards Chertsey, and striding hurriedly towardsthe river. Little cowled figures they seemed at first, going with arolling motion and as fast as flying birds.Then, advancing obliquely towards us, came a fifth. Their armouredbodies glittered in the sun as they swept swiftly forward upon theguns, growing rapidly larger as they drew nearer. One on the extremeleft, the remotest that is, flourished a huge case high in the air, andthe ghostly, terrible Heat-Ray I had already seen on Friday night smotetowards Chertsey, and struck the town.At sight of these strange, swift, and terrible creatures the crowd nearthe water’s edge seemed to me to be for a moment horror-struck. Therewas no screaming or shouting, but a silence. Then a hoarse murmur and amovement of feet—a splashing from the water. A man, too frightened todrop the portmanteau he carried on his shoulder, swung round and sentme staggering with a blow from the corner of his burden. A woman thrustat me with her hand and rushed past me. I turned with the rush of thepeople, but I was not too terrified for thought. The terrible Heat-Raywas in my mind. To get under water! That was it!“Get under water!” I shouted, unheeded.I faced about again, and rushed towards the approaching Martian, rushedright down the gravelly beach and headlong into the water. Others didthe same. A boatload of people putting back came leaping out as Irushed past. The stones under my feet were muddy and slippery, and theriver was so low that I ran perhaps twenty feet scarcely waist-deep.Then, as the Martian towered overhead scarcely a couple of hundredyards away, I flung myself forward under the surface. The splashes ofthe people in the boats leaping into the river sounded likethunderclaps in my ears. People were landing hastily on both sides ofthe river. But the Martian machine took no more notice for the momentof the people running this way and that than a man would of theconfusion of ants in a nest against which his foot has kicked. When,half suffocated, I raised my head above water, the Martian’s hoodpointed at the batteries that were still firing across the river, andas it advanced it swung loose what must have been the generator of theHeat-Ray.In another moment it was on the bank, and in a stride wading halfwayacross. The knees of its foremost legs bent at the farther bank, and inanother moment it had raised itself to its full height again, close tothe village of Shepperton. Forthwith the six guns which, unknown toanyone on the right bank, had been hidden behind the outskirts of thatvillage, fired simultaneously. The sudden near concussion, the lastclose upon the first, made my heart jump. The monster was alreadyraising the case generating the Heat-Ray as the first shell burst sixyards above the hood.I gave a cry of astonishment. I saw and thought nothing of the otherfour Martian monsters; my attention was riveted upon the nearerincident. Simultaneously two other shells burst in the air near thebody as the hood twisted round in time to receive, but not in time tododge, the fourth shell.The shell burst clean in the face of the Thing. The hood bulged,flashed, was whirled off in a dozen tattered fragments of red flesh andglittering metal.“Hit!” shouted I, with something between a scream and a cheer.I heard answering shouts from the people in the water about me. I couldhave leaped out of the water with that momentary exultation.The decapitated colossus reeled like a drunken giant; but it did notfall over. It recovered its balance by a miracle, and, no longerheeding its steps and with the camera that fired the Heat-Ray nowrigidly upheld, it reeled swiftly upon Shepperton. The livingintelligence, the Martian within the hood, was slain and splashed tothe four winds of heaven, and the Thing was now but a mere intricatedevice of metal whirling to destruction. It drove along in a straightline, incapable of guidance. It struck the tower of Shepperton Church,smashing it down as the impact of a battering ram might have done,swerved aside, blundered on and collapsed with tremendous force intothe river out of my sight.A violent explosion shook the air, and a spout of water, steam, mud,and shattered metal shot far up into the sky. As the camera of theHeat-Ray hit the water, the latter had immediately flashed into steam.In another moment a huge wave, like a muddy tidal bore but almostscaldingly hot, came sweeping round the bend upstream. I saw peoplestruggling shorewards, and heard their screaming and shouting faintlyabove the seething and roar of the Martian’s collapse.For a moment I heeded nothing of the heat, forgot the patent need ofself-preservation. I splashed through the tumultuous water, pushingaside a man in black to do so, until I could see round the bend. Half adozen deserted boats pitched aimlessly upon the confusion of the waves.The fallen Martian came into sight downstream, lying across the river,and for the most part submerged.Thick clouds of steam were pouring off the wreckage, and through thetumultuously whirling wisps I could see, intermittently and vaguely,the gigantic limbs churning the water and flinging a splash and sprayof mud and froth into the air. The tentacles swayed and struck likeliving arms, and, save for the helpless purposelessness of thesemovements, it was as if some wounded thing were struggling for its lifeamid the waves. Enormous quantities of a ruddy-brown fluid werespurting up in noisy jets out of the machine.My attention was diverted from this death flurry by a furious yelling,like that of the thing called a siren in our manufacturing towns. Aman, knee-deep near the towing path, shouted inaudibly to me andpointed. Looking back, I saw the other Martians advancing with giganticstrides down the riverbank from the direction of Chertsey. TheShepperton guns spoke this time unavailingly.At that I ducked at once under water, and, holding my breath untilmovement was an agony, blundered painfully ahead under the surface aslong as I could. The water was in a tumult about me, and rapidlygrowing hotter.When for a moment I raised my head to take breath and throw the hairand water from my eyes, the steam was rising in a whirling white fogthat at first hid the Martians altogether. The noise was deafening.Then I saw them dimly, colossal figures of grey, magnified by the mist.They had passed by me, and two were stooping over the frothing,tumultuous ruins of their comrade.The third and fourth stood beside him in the water, one perhaps twohundred yards from me, the other towards Laleham. The generators of theHeat-Rays waved high, and the hissing beams smote down this way andthat.The air was full of sound, a deafening and confusing conflict ofnoises—the clangorous din of the Martians, the crash of falling houses,the thud of trees, fences, sheds flashing into flame, and the cracklingand roaring of fire. Dense black smoke was leaping up to mingle withthe steam from the river, and as the Heat-Ray went to and fro overWeybridge its impact was marked by flashes of incandescent white, thatgave place at once to a smoky dance of lurid flames. The nearer housesstill stood intact, awaiting their fate, shadowy, faint and pallid inthe steam, with the fire behind them going to and fro.For a moment perhaps I stood there, breast-high in the almost boilingwater, dumbfounded at my position, hopeless of escape. Through the reekI could see the people who had been with me in the river scrambling outof the water through the reeds, like little frogs hurrying throughgrass from the advance of a man, or running to and fro in utter dismayon the towing path.Then suddenly the white flashes of the Heat-Ray came leaping towardsme. The houses caved in as they dissolved at its touch, and darted outflames; the trees changed to fire with a roar. The Ray flickered up anddown the towing path, licking off the people who ran this way and that,and came down to the water’s edge not fifty yards from where I stood.It swept across the river to Shepperton, and the water in its trackrose in a boiling weal crested with steam. I turned shoreward.In another moment the huge wave, well-nigh at the boiling-point hadrushed upon me. I screamed aloud, and scalded, half blinded, agonised,I staggered through the leaping, hissing water towards the shore. Hadmy foot stumbled, it would have been the end. I fell helplessly, infull sight of the Martians, upon the broad, bare gravelly spit thatruns down to mark the angle of the Wey and Thames. I expected nothingbut death.I have a dim memory of the foot of a Martian coming down within a scoreof yards of my head, driving straight into the loose gravel, whirlingit this way and that and lifting again; of a long suspense, and then ofthe four carrying the debris of their comrade between them, now clearand then presently faint through a veil of smoke, recedinginterminably, as it seemed to me, across a vast space of river andmeadow. And then, very slowly, I realised that by a miracle I hadescaped.XIII.HOW I FELL IN WITH THE CURATE.After getting this sudden lesson in the power of terrestrial weapons,the Martians retreated to their original position upon Horsell Common;and in their haste, and encumbered with the debris of their smashedcompanion, they no doubt overlooked many such a stray and negligiblevictim as myself. Had they left their comrade and pushed on forthwith,there was nothing at that time between them and London but batteries oftwelve-pounder guns, and they would certainly have reached the capitalin advance of the tidings of their approach; as sudden, dreadful, anddestructive their advent would have been as the earthquake thatdestroyed Lisbon a century ago.But they were in no hurry. Cylinder followed cylinder on itsinterplanetary flight; every twenty-four hours brought themreinforcement. And meanwhile the military and naval authorities, nowfully alive to the tremendous power of their antagonists, worked withfurious energy. Every minute a fresh gun came into position until,before twilight, every copse, every row of suburban villas on the hillyslopes about Kingston and Richmond, masked an expectant black muzzle.And through the charred and desolated area—perhaps twenty square milesaltogether—that encircled the Martian encampment on Horsell Common,through charred and ruined villages among the green trees, through theblackened and smoking arcades that had been but a day ago pinespinneys, crawled the devoted scouts with the heliographs that werepresently to warn the gunners of the Martian approach. But the Martiansnow understood our command of artillery and the danger of humanproximity, and not a man ventured within a mile of either cylinder,save at the price of his life.It would seem that these giants spent the earlier part of the afternoonin going to and fro, transferring everything from the second and thirdcylinders—the second in Addlestone Golf Links and the third atPyrford—to their original pit on Horsell Common. Over that, above theblackened heather and ruined buildings that stretched far and wide,stood one as sentinel, while the rest abandoned their vastfighting-machines and descended into the pit. They were hard at workthere far into the night, and the towering pillar of dense green smokethat rose therefrom could be seen from the hills about Merrow, andeven, it is said, from Banstead and Epsom Downs.And while the Martians behind me were thus preparing for their nextsally, and in front of me Humanity gathered for the battle, I made myway with infinite pains and labour from the fire and smoke of burningWeybridge towards London.I saw an abandoned boat, very small and remote, drifting down-stream;and throwing off the most of my sodden clothes, I went after it, gainedit, and so escaped out of that destruction. There were no oars in theboat, but I contrived to paddle, as well as my parboiled hands wouldallow, down the river towards Halliford and Walton, going verytediously and continually looking behind me, as you may wellunderstand. I followed the river, because I considered that the watergave me my best chance of escape should these giants return.The hot water from the Martian’s overthrow drifted downstream with me,so that for the best part of a mile I could see little of either bank.Once, however, I made out a string of black figures hurrying across themeadows from the direction of Weybridge. Halliford, it seemed, wasdeserted, and several of the houses facing the river were on fire. Itwas strange to see the place quite tranquil, quite desolate under thehot blue sky, with the smoke and little threads of flame going straightup into the heat of the afternoon. Never before had I seen housesburning without the accompaniment of an obstructive crowd. A littlefarther on the dry reeds up the bank were smoking and glowing, and aline of fire inland was marching steadily across a late field of hay.For a long time I drifted, so painful and weary was I after theviolence I had been through, and so intense the heat upon the water.Then my fears got the better of me again, and I resumed my paddling.The sun scorched my bare back. At last, as the bridge at Walton wascoming into sight round the bend, my fever and faintness overcame myfears, and I landed on the Middlesex bank and lay down, deadly sick,amid the long grass. I suppose the time was then about four or fiveo’clock. I got up presently, walked perhaps half a mile without meetinga soul, and then lay down again in the shadow of a hedge. I seem toremember talking, wanderingly, to myself during that last spurt. I wasalso very thirsty, and bitterly regretful I had drunk no more water. Itis a curious thing that I felt angry with my wife; I cannot account forit, but my impotent desire to reach Leatherhead worried me excessively.I do not clearly remember the arrival of the curate, so that probably Idozed. I became aware of him as a seated figure in soot-smudged shirtsleeves, and with his upturned, clean-shaven face staring at a faintflickering that danced over the sky. The sky was what is called amackerel sky—rows and rows of faint down-plumes of cloud, just tintedwith the midsummer sunset.I sat up, and at the rustle of my motion he looked at me quickly.“Have you any water?” I asked abruptly.He shook his head.“You have been asking for water for the last hour,” he said.For a moment we were silent, taking stock of each other. I dare say hefound me a strange enough figure, naked, save for my water-soakedtrousers and socks, scalded, and my face and shoulders blackened by thesmoke. His face was a fair weakness, his chin retreated, and his hairlay in crisp, almost flaxen curls on his low forehead; his eyes wererather large, pale blue, and blankly staring. He spoke abruptly,looking vacantly away from me.“What does it mean?” he said. “What do these things mean?”I stared at him and made no answer.He extended a thin white hand and spoke in almost a complaining tone.“Why are these things permitted? What sins have we done? The morningservice was over, I was walking through the roads to clear my brain forthe afternoon, and then—fire, earthquake, death! As if it were Sodomand Gomorrah! All our work undone, all the work—— What are theseMartians?”“What are we?” I answered, clearing my throat.He gripped his knees and turned to look at me again. For half a minute,perhaps, he stared silently.“I was walking through the roads to clear my brain,” he said. “Andsuddenly—fire, earthquake, death!”He relapsed into silence, with his chin now sunken almost to his knees.Presently he began waving his hand.“All the work—all the Sunday schools—What have we done—what hasWeybridge done? Everything gone—everything destroyed. The church! Werebuilt it only three years ago. Gone! Swept out of existence! Why?”Another pause, and he broke out again like one demented.“The smoke of her burning goeth up for ever and ever!” he shouted.His eyes flamed, and he pointed a lean finger in the direction ofWeybridge.By this time I was beginning to take his measure. The tremendoustragedy in which he had been involved—it was evident he was a fugitivefrom Weybridge—had driven him to the very verge of his reason.“Are we far from Sunbury?” I said, in a matter-of-fact tone.“What are we to do?” he asked. “Are these creatures everywhere? Has theearth been given over to them?”“Are we far from Sunbury?”“Only this morning I officiated at early celebration——”“Things have changed,” I said, quietly. “You must keep your head. Thereis still hope.”“Hope!”“Yes. Plentiful hope—for all this destruction!”I began to explain my view of our position. He listened at first, butas I went on the interest dawning in his eyes gave place to theirformer stare, and his regard wandered from me.“This must be the beginning of the end,” he said, interrupting me. “Theend! The great and terrible day of the Lord! When men shall call uponthe mountains and the rocks to fall upon them and hide them—hide themfrom the face of Him that sitteth upon the throne!”I began to understand the position. I ceased my laboured reasoning,struggled to my feet, and, standing over him, laid my hand on hisshoulder.“Be a man!” said I. “You are scared out of your wits! What good isreligion if it collapses under calamity? Think of what earthquakes andfloods, wars and volcanoes, have done before to men! Did you think Godhad exempted Weybridge? He is not an insurance agent.”For a time he sat in blank silence.“But how can we escape?” he asked, suddenly. “They are invulnerable,they are pitiless.”“Neither the one nor, perhaps, the other,” I answered. “And themightier they are the more sane and wary should we be. One of them waskilled yonder not three hours ago.”“Killed!” he said, staring about him. “How can God’s ministers bekilled?”“I saw it happen.” I proceeded to tell him. “We have chanced to come infor the thick of it,” said I, “and that is all.”“What is that flicker in the sky?” he asked abruptly.I told him it was the heliograph signalling—that it was the sign ofhuman help and effort in the sky.“We are in the midst of it,” I said, “quiet as it is. That flicker inthe sky tells of the gathering storm. Yonder, I take it are theMartians, and Londonward, where those hills rise about Richmond andKingston and the trees give cover, earthworks are being thrown up andguns are being placed. Presently the Martians will be coming this wayagain.”And even as I spoke he sprang to his feet and stopped me by a gesture.“Listen!” he said.From beyond the low hills across the water came the dull resonance ofdistant guns and a remote weird crying. Then everything was still. Acockchafer came droning over the hedge and past us. High in the westthe crescent moon hung faint and pale above the smoke of Weybridge andShepperton and the hot, still splendour of the sunset.“We had better follow this path,” I said, “northward.”XIV.IN LONDON.My younger brother was in London when the Martians fell at Woking. Hewas a medical student working for an imminent examination, and he heardnothing of the arrival until Saturday morning. The morning papers onSaturday contained, in addition to lengthy special articles on theplanet Mars, on life in the planets, and so forth, a brief and vaguelyworded telegram, all the more striking for its brevity.The Martians, alarmed by the approach of a crowd, had killed a numberof people with a quick-firing gun, so the story ran. The telegramconcluded with the words: “Formidable as they seem to be, the Martianshave not moved from the pit into which they have fallen, and, indeed,seem incapable of doing so. Probably this is due to the relativestrength of the earth’s gravitational energy.” On that last text theirleader-writer expanded very comfortingly.Of course all the students in the crammer’s biology class, to which mybrother went that day, were intensely interested, but there were nosigns of any unusual excitement in the streets. The afternoon paperspuffed scraps of news under big headlines. They had nothing to tellbeyond the movements of troops about the common, and the burning of thepine woods between Woking and Weybridge, until eight. Then the _St.James’s Gazette_, in an extra-special edition, announced the bare factof the interruption of telegraphic communication. This was thought tobe due to the falling of burning pine trees across the line. Nothingmore of the fighting was known that night, the night of my drive toLeatherhead and back.My brother felt no anxiety about us, as he knew from the description inthe papers that the cylinder was a good two miles from my house. Hemade up his mind to run down that night to me, in order, as he says, tosee the Things before they were killed. He dispatched a telegram, whichnever reached me, about four o’clock, and spent the evening at a musichall.In London, also, on Saturday night there was a thunderstorm, and mybrother reached Waterloo in a cab. On the platform from which themidnight train usually starts he learned, after some waiting, that anaccident prevented trains from reaching Woking that night. The natureof the accident he could not ascertain; indeed, the railway authoritiesdid not clearly know at that time. There was very little excitement inthe station, as the officials, failing to realise that anything furtherthan a breakdown between Byfleet and Woking junction had occurred, wererunning the theatre trains which usually passed through Woking round byVirginia Water or Guildford. They were busy making the necessaryarrangements to alter the route of the Southampton and PortsmouthSunday League excursions. A nocturnal newspaper reporter, mistaking mybrother for the traffic manager, to whom he bears a slight resemblance,waylaid and tried to interview him. Few people, excepting the railwayofficials, connected the breakdown with the Martians.I have read, in another account of these events, that on Sunday morning“all London was electrified by the news from Woking.” As a matter offact, there was nothing to justify that very extravagant phrase. Plentyof Londoners did not hear of the Martians until the panic of Mondaymorning. Those who did took some time to realise all that the hastilyworded telegrams in the Sunday papers conveyed. The majority of peoplein London do not read Sunday papers.The habit of personal security, moreover, is so deeply fixed in theLondoner’s mind, and startling intelligence so much a matter of coursein the papers, that they could read without any personal tremors:“About seven o’clock last night the Martians came out of the cylinder,and, moving about under an armour of metallic shields, have completelywrecked Woking station with the adjacent houses, and massacred anentire battalion of the Cardigan Regiment. No details are known. Maximshave been absolutely useless against their armour; the field guns havebeen disabled by them. Flying hussars have been galloping intoChertsey. The Martians appear to be moving slowly towards Chertsey orWindsor. Great anxiety prevails in West Surrey, and earthworks arebeing thrown up to check the advance Londonward.” That was how the_Sunday Sun_ put it, and a clever and remarkably prompt “handbook”article in the _Referee_ compared the affair to a menagerie suddenlylet loose in a village.No one in London knew positively of the nature of the armouredMartians, and there was still a fixed idea that these monsters must besluggish: “crawling,” “creeping painfully”—such expressions occurred inalmost all the earlier reports. None of the telegrams could have beenwritten by an eyewitness of their advance. The Sunday papers printedseparate editions as further news came to hand, some even in default ofit. But there was practically nothing more to tell people until late inthe afternoon, when the authorities gave the press agencies the news intheir possession. It was stated that the people of Walton andWeybridge, and all the district were pouring along the roadsLondonward, and that was all.My brother went to church at the Foundling Hospital in the morning,still in ignorance of what had happened on the previous night. There heheard allusions made to the invasion, and a special prayer for peace.Coming out, he bought a _Referee_. He became alarmed at the news inthis, and went again to Waterloo station to find out if communicationwere restored. The omnibuses, carriages, cyclists, and innumerablepeople walking in their best clothes seemed scarcely affected by thestrange intelligence that the newsvendors were disseminating. Peoplewere interested, or, if alarmed, alarmed only on account of the localresidents. At the station he heard for the first time that the Windsorand Chertsey lines were now interrupted. The porters told him thatseveral remarkable telegrams had been received in the morning fromByfleet and Chertsey stations, but that these had abruptly ceased. Mybrother could get very little precise detail out of them.“There’s fighting going on about Weybridge” was the extent of theirinformation.The train service was now very much disorganised. Quite a number ofpeople who had been expecting friends from places on the South-Westernnetwork were standing about the station. One grey-headed old gentlemancame and abused the South-Western Company bitterly to my brother. “Itwants showing up,” he said.One or two trains came in from Richmond, Putney, and Kingston,containing people who had gone out for a day’s boating and found thelocks closed and a feeling of panic in the air. A man in a blue andwhite blazer addressed my brother, full of strange tidings.“There’s hosts of people driving into Kingston in traps and carts andthings, with boxes of valuables and all that,” he said. “They come fromMolesey and Weybridge and Walton, and they say there’s been guns heardat Chertsey, heavy firing, and that mounted soldiers have told them toget off at once because the Martians are coming. We heard guns firingat Hampton Court station, but we thought it was thunder. What thedickens does it all mean? The Martians can’t get out of their pit, canthey?”My brother could not tell him.Afterwards he found that the vague feeling of alarm had spread to theclients of the underground railway, and that the Sunday excursionistsbegan to return from all over the South-Western “lung”—Barnes,Wimbledon, Richmond Park, Kew, and so forth—at unnaturally early hours;but not a soul had anything more than vague hearsay to tell of.Everyone connected with the terminus seemed ill-tempered.About five o’clock the gathering crowd in the station was immenselyexcited by the opening of the line of communication, which is almostinvariably closed, between the South-Eastern and the South-Westernstations, and the passage of carriage trucks bearing huge guns andcarriages crammed with soldiers. These were the guns that were broughtup from Woolwich and Chatham to cover Kingston. There was an exchangeof pleasantries: “You’ll get eaten!” “We’re the beast-tamers!” and soforth. A little while after that a squad of police came into thestation and began to clear the public off the platforms, and my brotherwent out into the street again.The church bells were ringing for evensong, and a squad of SalvationArmy lassies came singing down Waterloo Road. On the bridge a number ofloafers were watching a curious brown scum that came drifting down thestream in patches. The sun was just setting, and the Clock Tower andthe Houses of Parliament rose against one of the most peaceful skies itis possible to imagine, a sky of gold, barred with long transversestripes of reddish-purple cloud. There was talk of a floating body. Oneof the men there, a reservist he said he was, told my brother he hadseen the heliograph flickering in the west.In Wellington Street my brother met a couple of sturdy roughs who hadjust been rushed out of Fleet Street with still-wet newspapers andstaring placards. “Dreadful catastrophe!” they bawled one to the otherdown Wellington Street. “Fighting at Weybridge! Full description!Repulse of the Martians! London in Danger!” He had to give threepencefor a copy of that paper.Then it was, and then only, that he realised something of the fullpower and terror of these monsters. He learned that they were notmerely a handful of small sluggish creatures, but that they were mindsswaying vast mechanical bodies; and that they could move swiftly andsmite with such power that even the mightiest guns could not standagainst them.They were described as “vast spiderlike machines, nearly a hundred feethigh, capable of the speed of an express train, and able to shoot out abeam of intense heat.” Masked batteries, chiefly of field guns, hadbeen planted in the country about Horsell Common, and especiallybetween the Woking district and London. Five of the machines had beenseen moving towards the Thames, and one, by a happy chance, had beendestroyed. In the other cases the shells had missed, and the batterieshad been at once annihilated by the Heat-Rays. Heavy losses of soldierswere mentioned, but the tone of the dispatch was optimistic.The Martians had been repulsed; they were not invulnerable. They hadretreated to their triangle of cylinders again, in the circle aboutWoking. Signallers with heliographs were pushing forward upon them fromall sides. Guns were in rapid transit from Windsor, Portsmouth,Aldershot, Woolwich—even from the north; among others, long wire-gunsof ninety-five tons from Woolwich. Altogether one hundred and sixteenwere in position or being hastily placed, chiefly covering London.Never before in England had there been such a vast or rapidconcentration of military material.Any further cylinders that fell, it was hoped, could be destroyed atonce by high explosives, which were being rapidly manufactured anddistributed. No doubt, ran the report, the situation was of thestrangest and gravest description, but the public was exhorted to avoidand discourage panic. No doubt the Martians were strange and terriblein the extreme, but at the outside there could not be more than twentyof them against our millions.The authorities had reason to suppose, from the size of the cylinders,that at the outside there could not be more than five in eachcylinder—fifteen altogether. And one at least was disposed of—perhapsmore. The public would be fairly warned of the approach of danger, andelaborate measures were being taken for the protection of the people inthe threatened southwestern suburbs. And so, with reiterated assurancesof the safety of London and the ability of the authorities to cope withthe difficulty, this quasi-proclamation closed.This was printed in enormous type on paper so fresh that it was stillwet, and there had been no time to add a word of comment. It wascurious, my brother said, to see how ruthlessly the usual contents ofthe paper had been hacked and taken out to give this place.All down Wellington Street people could be seen fluttering out the pinksheets and reading, and the Strand was suddenly noisy with the voicesof an army of hawkers following these pioneers. Men came scrambling offbuses to secure copies. Certainly this news excited people intensely,whatever their previous apathy. The shutters of a map shop in theStrand were being taken down, my brother said, and a man in his Sundayraiment, lemon-yellow gloves even, was visible inside the windowhastily fastening maps of Surrey to the glass.Going on along the Strand to Trafalgar Square, the paper in his hand,my brother saw some of the fugitives from West Surrey. There was a manwith his wife and two boys and some articles of furniture in a cartsuch as greengrocers use. He was driving from the direction ofWestminster Bridge; and close behind him came a hay waggon with five orsix respectable-looking people in it, and some boxes and bundles. Thefaces of these people were haggard, and their entire appearancecontrasted conspicuously with the Sabbath-best appearance of the peopleon the omnibuses. People in fashionable clothing peeped at them out ofcabs. They stopped at the Square as if undecided which way to take, andfinally turned eastward along the Strand. Some way behind these came aman in workday clothes, riding one of those old-fashioned tricycleswith a small front wheel. He was dirty and white in the face.My brother turned down towards Victoria, and met a number of suchpeople. He had a vague idea that he might see something of me. Henoticed an unusual number of police regulating the traffic. Some of therefugees were exchanging news with the people on the omnibuses. One wasprofessing to have seen the Martians. “Boilers on stilts, I tell you,striding along like men.” Most of them were excited and animated bytheir strange experience.Beyond Victoria the public-houses were doing a lively trade with thesearrivals. At all the street corners groups of people were readingpapers, talking excitedly, or staring at these unusual Sunday visitors.They seemed to increase as night drew on, until at last the roads, mybrother said, were like Epsom High Street on a Derby Day. My brotheraddressed several of these fugitives and got unsatisfactory answersfrom most.None of them could tell him any news of Woking except one man, whoassured him that Woking had been entirely destroyed on the previousnight.“I come from Byfleet,” he said; “a man on a bicycle came through theplace in the early morning, and ran from door to door warning us tocome away. Then came soldiers. We went out to look, and there wereclouds of smoke to the south—nothing but smoke, and not a soul comingthat way. Then we heard the guns at Chertsey, and folks coming fromWeybridge. So I’ve locked up my house and come on.”At that time there was a strong feeling in the streets that theauthorities were to blame for their incapacity to dispose of theinvaders without all this inconvenience.About eight o’clock a noise of heavy firing was distinctly audible allover the south of London. My brother could not hear it for the trafficin the main thoroughfares, but by striking through the quiet backstreets to the river he was able to distinguish it quite plainly.He walked from Westminster to his apartments near Regent’s Park, abouttwo. He was now very anxious on my account, and disturbed at theevident magnitude of the trouble. His mind was inclined to run, even asmine had run on Saturday, on military details. He thought of all thosesilent, expectant guns, of the suddenly nomadic countryside; he triedto imagine “boilers on stilts” a hundred feet high.There were one or two cartloads of refugees passing along OxfordStreet, and several in the Marylebone Road, but so slowly was the newsspreading that Regent Street and Portland Place were full of theirusual Sunday-night promenaders, albeit they talked in groups, and alongthe edge of Regent’s Park there were as many silent couples “walkingout” together under the scattered gas lamps as ever there had been. Thenight was warm and still, and a little oppressive; the sound of gunscontinued intermittently, and after midnight there seemed to be sheetlightning in the south.He read and re-read the paper, fearing the worst had happened to me. Hewas restless, and after supper prowled out again aimlessly. He returnedand tried in vain to divert his attention to his examination notes. Hewent to bed a little after midnight, and was awakened from lurid dreamsin the small hours of Monday by the sound of door knockers, feetrunning in the street, distant drumming, and a clamour of bells. Redreflections danced on the ceiling. For a moment he lay astonished,wondering whether day had come or the world gone mad. Then he jumpedout of bed and ran to the window.His room was an attic and as he thrust his head out, up and down thestreet there were a dozen echoes to the noise of his window sash, andheads in every kind of night disarray appeared. Enquiries were beingshouted. “They are coming!” bawled a policeman, hammering at the door;“the Martians are coming!” and hurried to the next door.The sound of drumming and trumpeting came from the Albany StreetBarracks, and every church within earshot was hard at work killingsleep with a vehement disorderly tocsin. There was a noise of doorsopening, and window after window in the houses opposite flashed fromdarkness into yellow illumination.Up the street came galloping a closed carriage, bursting abruptly intonoise at the corner, rising to a clattering climax under the window,and dying away slowly in the distance. Close on the rear of this came acouple of cabs, the forerunners of a long procession of flyingvehicles, going for the most part to Chalk Farm station, where theNorth-Western special trains were loading up, instead of coming downthe gradient into Euston.For a long time my brother stared out of the window in blankastonishment, watching the policemen hammering at door after door, anddelivering their incomprehensible message. Then the door behind himopened, and the man who lodged across the landing came in, dressed onlyin shirt, trousers, and slippers, his braces loose about his waist, hishair disordered from his pillow.“What the devil is it?” he asked. “A fire? What a devil of a row!”They both craned their heads out of the window, straining to hear whatthe policemen were shouting. People were coming out of the sidestreets, and standing in groups at the corners talking.“What the devil is it all about?” said my brother’s fellow lodger.My brother answered him vaguely and began to dress, running with eachgarment to the window in order to miss nothing of the growingexcitement. And presently men selling unnaturally early newspapers camebawling into the street:“London in danger of suffocation! The Kingston and Richmond defencesforced! Fearful massacres in the Thames Valley!”And all about him—in the rooms below, in the houses on each side andacross the road, and behind in the Park Terraces and in the hundredother streets of that part of Marylebone, and the Westbourne Parkdistrict and St. Pancras, and westward and northward in Kilburn and St.John’s Wood and Hampstead, and eastward in Shoreditch and Highbury andHaggerston and Hoxton, and, indeed, through all the vastness of Londonfrom Ealing to East Ham—people were rubbing their eyes, and openingwindows to stare out and ask aimless questions, dressing hastily as thefirst breath of the coming storm of Fear blew through the streets. Itwas the dawn of the great panic. London, which had gone to bed onSunday night oblivious and inert, was awakened, in the small hours ofMonday morning, to a vivid sense of danger.Unable from his window to learn what was happening, my brother wentdown and out into the street, just as the sky between the parapets ofthe houses grew pink with the early dawn. The flying people on foot andin vehicles grew more numerous every moment. “Black Smoke!” he heardpeople crying, and again “Black Smoke!” The contagion of such aunanimous fear was inevitable. As my brother hesitated on thedoor-step, he saw another newsvendor approaching, and got a paperforthwith. The man was running away with the rest, and selling hispapers for a shilling each as he ran—a grotesque mingling of profit andpanic.And from this paper my brother read that catastrophic dispatch of theCommander-in-Chief:“The Martians are able to discharge enormous clouds of a black andpoisonous vapour by means of rockets. They have smothered ourbatteries, destroyed Richmond, Kingston, and Wimbledon, and areadvancing slowly towards London, destroying everything on the way. Itis impossible to stop them. There is no safety from the Black Smoke butin instant flight.”That was all, but it was enough. The whole population of the greatsix-million city was stirring, slipping, running; presently it would bepouring _en masse_ northward.“Black Smoke!” the voices cried. “Fire!”The bells of the neighbouring church made a jangling tumult, a cartcarelessly driven smashed, amid shrieks and curses, against the watertrough up the street. Sickly yellow lights went to and fro in thehouses, and some of the passing cabs flaunted unextinguished lamps. Andoverhead the dawn was growing brighter, clear and steady and calm.He heard footsteps running to and fro in the rooms, and up and downstairs behind him. His landlady came to the door, loosely wrapped indressing gown and shawl; her husband followed, ejaculating.As my brother began to realise the import of all these things, heturned hastily to his own room, put all his available money—some tenpounds altogether—into his pockets, and went out again into thestreets.XV.WHAT HAD HAPPENED IN SURREY.It was while the curate had sat and talked so wildly to me under thehedge in the flat meadows near Halliford, and while my brother waswatching the fugitives stream over Westminster Bridge, that theMartians had resumed the offensive. So far as one can ascertain fromthe conflicting accounts that have been put forth, the majority of themremained busied with preparations in the Horsell pit until nine thatnight, hurrying on some operation that disengaged huge volumes of greensmoke.But three certainly came out about eight o’clock and, advancing slowlyand cautiously, made their way through Byfleet and Pyrford towardsRipley and Weybridge, and so came in sight of the expectant batteriesagainst the setting sun. These Martians did not advance in a body, butin a line, each perhaps a mile and a half from his nearest fellow. Theycommunicated with one another by means of sirenlike howls, running upand down the scale from one note to another.It was this howling and firing of the guns at Ripley and St. George’sHill that we had heard at Upper Halliford. The Ripley gunners,unseasoned artillery volunteers who ought never to have been placed insuch a position, fired one wild, premature, ineffectual volley, andbolted on horse and foot through the deserted village, while theMartian, without using his Heat-Ray, walked serenely over their guns,stepped gingerly among them, passed in front of them, and so cameunexpectedly upon the guns in Painshill Park, which he destroyed.The St. George’s Hill men, however, were better led or of a bettermettle. Hidden by a pine wood as they were, they seem to have beenquite unsuspected by the Martian nearest to them. They laid their gunsas deliberately as if they had been on parade, and fired at about athousand yards’ range.The shells flashed all round him, and he was seen to advance a fewpaces, stagger, and go down. Everybody yelled together, and the gunswere reloaded in frantic haste. The overthrown Martian set up aprolonged ululation, and immediately a second glittering giant,answering him, appeared over the trees to the south. It would seem thata leg of the tripod had been smashed by one of the shells. The whole ofthe second volley flew wide of the Martian on the ground, and,simultaneously, both his companions brought their Heat-Rays to bear onthe battery. The ammunition blew up, the pine trees all about the gunsflashed into fire, and only one or two of the men who were alreadyrunning over the crest of the hill escaped.After this it would seem that the three took counsel together andhalted, and the scouts who were watching them report that they remainedabsolutely stationary for the next half hour. The Martian who had beenoverthrown crawled tediously out of his hood, a small brown figure,oddly suggestive from that distance of a speck of blight, andapparently engaged in the repair of his support. About nine he hadfinished, for his cowl was then seen above the trees again.It was a few minutes past nine that night when these three sentinelswere joined by four other Martians, each carrying a thick black tube. Asimilar tube was handed to each of the three, and the seven proceededto distribute themselves at equal distances along a curved line betweenSt. George’s Hill, Weybridge, and the village of Send, southwest ofRipley.A dozen rockets sprang out of the hills before them so soon as theybegan to move, and warned the waiting batteries about Ditton and Esher.At the same time four of their fighting machines, similarly armed withtubes, crossed the river, and two of them, black against the westernsky, came into sight of myself and the curate as we hurried wearily andpainfully along the road that runs northward out of Halliford. Theymoved, as it seemed to us, upon a cloud, for a milky mist covered thefields and rose to a third of their height.At this sight the curate cried faintly in his throat, and beganrunning; but I knew it was no good running from a Martian, and I turnedaside and crawled through dewy nettles and brambles into the broadditch by the side of the road. He looked back, saw what I was doing,and turned to join me.The two halted, the nearer to us standing and facing Sunbury, theremoter being a grey indistinctness towards the evening star, awaytowards Staines.The occasional howling of the Martians had ceased; they took up theirpositions in the huge crescent about their cylinders in absolutesilence. It was a crescent with twelve miles between its horns. Neversince the devising of gunpowder was the beginning of a battle so still.To us and to an observer about Ripley it would have had precisely thesame effect—the Martians seemed in solitary possession of the darklingnight, lit only as it was by the slender moon, the stars, the afterglowof the daylight, and the ruddy glare from St. George’s Hill and thewoods of Painshill.But facing that crescent everywhere—at Staines, Hounslow, Ditton,Esher, Ockham, behind hills and woods south of the river, and acrossthe flat grass meadows to the north of it, wherever a cluster of treesor village houses gave sufficient cover—the guns were waiting. Thesignal rockets burst and rained their sparks through the night andvanished, and the spirit of all those watching batteries rose to atense expectation. The Martians had but to advance into the line offire, and instantly those motionless black forms of men, those gunsglittering so darkly in the early night, would explode into athunderous fury of battle.No doubt the thought that was uppermost in a thousand of those vigilantminds, even as it was uppermost in mine, was the riddle—how much theyunderstood of us. Did they grasp that we in our millions wereorganized, disciplined, working together? Or did they interpret ourspurts of fire, the sudden stinging of our shells, our steadyinvestment of their encampment, as we should the furious unanimity ofonslaught in a disturbed hive of bees? Did they dream they mightexterminate us? (At that time no one knew what food they needed.) Ahundred such questions struggled together in my mind as I watched thatvast sentinel shape. And in the back of my mind was the sense of allthe huge unknown and hidden forces Londonward. Had they preparedpitfalls? Were the powder mills at Hounslow ready as a snare? Would theLondoners have the heart and courage to make a greater Moscow of theirmighty province of houses?Then, after an interminable time, as it seemed to us, crouching andpeering through the hedge, came a sound like the distant concussion ofa gun. Another nearer, and then another. And then the Martian beside usraised his tube on high and discharged it, gunwise, with a heavy reportthat made the ground heave. The one towards Staines answered him. Therewas no flash, no smoke, simply that loaded detonation.I was so excited by these heavy minute-guns following one another thatI so far forgot my personal safety and my scalded hands as to clamberup into the hedge and stare towards Sunbury. As I did so a secondreport followed, and a big projectile hurtled overhead towardsHounslow. I expected at least to see smoke or fire, or some suchevidence of its work. But all I saw was the deep blue sky above, withone solitary star, and the white mist spreading wide and low beneath.And there had been no crash, no answering explosion. The silence wasrestored; the minute lengthened to three.“What has happened?” said the curate, standing up beside me.“Heaven knows!” said I.A bat flickered by and vanished. A distant tumult of shouting began andceased. I looked again at the Martian, and saw he was now movingeastward along the riverbank, with a swift, rolling motion.Every moment I expected the fire of some hidden battery to spring uponhim; but the evening calm was unbroken. The figure of the Martian grewsmaller as he receded, and presently the mist and the gathering nighthad swallowed him up. By a common impulse we clambered higher. TowardsSunbury was a dark appearance, as though a conical hill had suddenlycome into being there, hiding our view of the farther country; andthen, remoter across the river, over Walton, we saw another suchsummit. These hill-like forms grew lower and broader even as we stared.Moved by a sudden thought, I looked northward, and there I perceived athird of these cloudy black kopjes had risen.Everything had suddenly become very still. Far away to the southeast,marking the quiet, we heard the Martians hooting to one another, andthen the air quivered again with the distant thud of their guns. Butthe earthly artillery made no reply.Now at the time we could not understand these things, but later I wasto learn the meaning of these ominous kopjes that gathered in thetwilight. Each of the Martians, standing in the great crescent I havedescribed, had discharged, by means of the gunlike tube he carried, ahuge canister over whatever hill, copse, cluster of houses, or otherpossible cover for guns, chanced to be in front of him. Some fired onlyone of these, some two—as in the case of the one we had seen; the oneat Ripley is said to have discharged no fewer than five at that time.These canisters smashed on striking the ground—they did not explode—andincontinently disengaged an enormous volume of heavy, inky vapour,coiling and pouring upward in a huge and ebony cumulus cloud, a gaseoushill that sank and spread itself slowly over the surrounding country.And the touch of that vapour, the inhaling of its pungent wisps, wasdeath to all that breathes.It was heavy, this vapour, heavier than the densest smoke, so that,after the first tumultuous uprush and outflow of its impact, it sankdown through the air and poured over the ground in a manner ratherliquid than gaseous, abandoning the hills, and streaming into thevalleys and ditches and watercourses even as I have heard thecarbonic-acid gas that pours from volcanic clefts is wont to do. Andwhere it came upon water some chemical action occurred, and the surfacewould be instantly covered with a powdery scum that sank slowly andmade way for more. The scum was absolutely insoluble, and it is astrange thing, seeing the instant effect of the gas, that one coulddrink without hurt the water from which it had been strained. Thevapour did not diffuse as a true gas would do. It hung together inbanks, flowing sluggishly down the slope of the land and drivingreluctantly before the wind, and very slowly it combined with the mistand moisture of the air, and sank to the earth in the form of dust.Save that an unknown element giving a group of four lines in the blueof the spectrum is concerned, we are still entirely ignorant of thenature of this substance.Once the tumultuous upheaval of its dispersion was over, the blacksmoke clung so closely to the ground, even before its precipitation,that fifty feet up in the air, on the roofs and upper stories of highhouses and on great trees, there was a chance of escaping its poisonaltogether, as was proved even that night at Street Cobham and Ditton.The man who escaped at the former place tells a wonderful story of thestrangeness of its coiling flow, and how he looked down from the churchspire and saw the houses of the village rising like ghosts out of itsinky nothingness. For a day and a half he remained there, weary,starving and sun-scorched, the earth under the blue sky and against theprospect of the distant hills a velvet-black expanse, with red roofs,green trees, and, later, black-veiled shrubs and gates, barns,outhouses, and walls, rising here and there into the sunlight.But that was at Street Cobham, where the black vapour was allowed toremain until it sank of its own accord into the ground. As a rule theMartians, when it had served its purpose, cleared the air of it againby wading into it and directing a jet of steam upon it.This they did with the vapour banks near us, as we saw in the starlightfrom the window of a deserted house at Upper Halliford, whither we hadreturned. From there we could see the searchlights on Richmond Hill andKingston Hill going to and fro, and about eleven the windows rattled,and we heard the sound of the huge siege guns that had been put inposition there. These continued intermittently for the space of aquarter of an hour, sending chance shots at the invisible Martians atHampton and Ditton, and then the pale beams of the electric lightvanished, and were replaced by a bright red glow.Then the fourth cylinder fell—a brilliant green meteor—as I learnedafterwards, in Bushey Park. Before the guns on the Richmond andKingston line of hills began, there was a fitful cannonade far away inthe southwest, due, I believe, to guns being fired haphazard before theblack vapour could overwhelm the gunners.So, setting about it as methodically as men might smoke out a wasps’nest, the Martians spread this strange stifling vapour over theLondonward country. The horns of the crescent slowly moved apart, untilat last they formed a line from Hanwell to Coombe and Malden. All nightthrough their destructive tubes advanced. Never once, after the Martianat St. George’s Hill was brought down, did they give the artillery theghost of a chance against them. Wherever there was a possibility ofguns being laid for them unseen, a fresh canister of the black vapourwas discharged, and where the guns were openly displayed the Heat-Raywas brought to bear.By midnight the blazing trees along the slopes of Richmond Park and theglare of Kingston Hill threw their light upon a network of black smoke,blotting out the whole valley of the Thames and extending as far as theeye could reach. And through this two Martians slowly waded, and turnedtheir hissing steam jets this way and that.They were sparing of the Heat-Ray that night, either because they hadbut a limited supply of material for its production or because they didnot wish to destroy the country but only to crush and overawe theopposition they had aroused. In the latter aim they certainlysucceeded. Sunday night was the end of the organised opposition totheir movements. After that no body of men would stand against them, sohopeless was the enterprise. Even the crews of the torpedo-boats anddestroyers that had brought their quick-firers up the Thames refused tostop, mutinied, and went down again. The only offensive operation menventured upon after that night was the preparation of mines andpitfalls, and even in that their energies were frantic and spasmodic.One has to imagine, as well as one may, the fate of those batteriestowards Esher, waiting so tensely in the twilight. Survivors there werenone. One may picture the orderly expectation, the officers alert andwatchful, the gunners ready, the ammunition piled to hand, the limbergunners with their horses and waggons, the groups of civilianspectators standing as near as they were permitted, the eveningstillness, the ambulances and hospital tents with the burned andwounded from Weybridge; then the dull resonance of the shots theMartians fired, and the clumsy projectile whirling over the trees andhouses and smashing amid the neighbouring fields.One may picture, too, the sudden shifting of the attention, the swiftlyspreading coils and bellyings of that blackness advancing headlong,towering heavenward, turning the twilight to a palpable darkness, astrange and horrible antagonist of vapour striding upon its victims,men and horses near it seen dimly, running, shrieking, fallingheadlong, shouts of dismay, the guns suddenly abandoned, men chokingand writhing on the ground, and the swift broadening-out of the opaquecone of smoke. And then night and extinction—nothing but a silent massof impenetrable vapour hiding its dead.Before dawn the black vapour was pouring through the streets ofRichmond, and the disintegrating organism of government was, with alast expiring effort, rousing the population of London to the necessityof flight.XVI.THE EXODUS FROM LONDON.So you understand the roaring wave of fear that swept through thegreatest city in the world just as Monday was dawning—the stream offlight rising swiftly to a torrent, lashing in a foaming tumult roundthe railway stations, banked up into a horrible struggle about theshipping in the Thames, and hurrying by every available channelnorthward and eastward. By ten o’clock the police organisation, and bymidday even the railway organisations, were losing coherency, losingshape and efficiency, guttering, softening, running at last in thatswift liquefaction of the social body.All the railway lines north of the Thames and the South-Eastern peopleat Cannon Street had been warned by midnight on Sunday, and trains werebeing filled. People were fighting savagely for standing-room in thecarriages even at two o’clock. By three, people were being trampled andcrushed even in Bishopsgate Street, a couple of hundred yards or morefrom Liverpool Street station; revolvers were fired, people stabbed,and the policemen who had been sent to direct the traffic, exhaustedand infuriated, were breaking the heads of the people they were calledout to protect.And as the day advanced and the engine drivers and stokers refused toreturn to London, the pressure of the flight drove the people in anever-thickening multitude away from the stations and along thenorthward-running roads. By midday a Martian had been seen at Barnes,and a cloud of slowly sinking black vapour drove along the Thames andacross the flats of Lambeth, cutting off all escape over the bridges inits sluggish advance. Another bank drove over Ealing, and surrounded alittle island of survivors on Castle Hill, alive, but unable to escape.After a fruitless struggle to get aboard a North-Western train at ChalkFarm—the engines of the trains that had loaded in the goods yard there_ploughed_ through shrieking people, and a dozen stalwart men fought tokeep the crowd from crushing the driver against his furnace—my brotheremerged upon the Chalk Farm road, dodged across through a hurryingswarm of vehicles, and had the luck to be foremost in the sack of acycle shop. The front tire of the machine he got was punctured indragging it through the window, but he got up and off, notwithstanding,with no further injury than a cut wrist. The steep foot of HaverstockHill was impassable owing to several overturned horses, and my brotherstruck into Belsize Road.So he got out of the fury of the panic, and, skirting the Edgware Road,reached Edgware about seven, fasting and wearied, but well ahead of thecrowd. Along the road people were standing in the roadway, curious,wondering. He was passed by a number of cyclists, some horsemen, andtwo motor cars. A mile from Edgware the rim of the wheel broke, and themachine became unridable. He left it by the roadside and trudgedthrough the village. There were shops half opened in the main street ofthe place, and people crowded on the pavement and in the doorways andwindows, staring astonished at this extraordinary procession offugitives that was beginning. He succeeded in getting some food at aninn.For a time he remained in Edgware not knowing what next to do. Theflying people increased in number. Many of them, like my brother,seemed inclined to loiter in the place. There was no fresh news of theinvaders from Mars.At that time the road was crowded, but as yet far from congested. Mostof the fugitives at that hour were mounted on cycles, but there weresoon motor cars, hansom cabs, and carriages hurrying along, and thedust hung in heavy clouds along the road to St. Albans.It was perhaps a vague idea of making his way to Chelmsford, where somefriends of his lived, that at last induced my brother to strike into aquiet lane running eastward. Presently he came upon a stile, and,crossing it, followed a footpath northeastward. He passed near severalfarmhouses and some little places whose names he did not learn. He sawfew fugitives until, in a grass lane towards High Barnet, he happenedupon two ladies who became his fellow travellers. He came upon themjust in time to save them.He heard their screams, and, hurrying round the corner, saw a couple ofmen struggling to drag them out of the little pony-chaise in which theyhad been driving, while a third with difficulty held the frightenedpony’s head. One of the ladies, a short woman dressed in white, wassimply screaming; the other, a dark, slender figure, slashed at the manwho gripped her arm with a whip she held in her disengaged hand.My brother immediately grasped the situation, shouted, and hurriedtowards the struggle. One of the men desisted and turned towards him,and my brother, realising from his antagonist’s face that a fight wasunavoidable, and being an expert boxer, went into him forthwith andsent him down against the wheel of the chaise.It was no time for pugilistic chivalry and my brother laid him quietwith a kick, and gripped the collar of the man who pulled at theslender lady’s arm. He heard the clatter of hoofs, the whip stungacross his face, a third antagonist struck him between the eyes, andthe man he held wrenched himself free and made off down the lane in thedirection from which he had come.Partly stunned, he found himself facing the man who had held thehorse’s head, and became aware of the chaise receding from him down thelane, swaying from side to side, and with the women in it looking back.The man before him, a burly rough, tried to close, and he stopped himwith a blow in the face. Then, realising that he was deserted, hedodged round and made off down the lane after the chaise, with thesturdy man close behind him, and the fugitive, who had turned now,following remotely.Suddenly he stumbled and fell; his immediate pursuer went headlong, andhe rose to his feet to find himself with a couple of antagonists again.He would have had little chance against them had not the slender ladyvery pluckily pulled up and returned to his help. It seems she had hada revolver all this time, but it had been under the seat when she andher companion were attacked. She fired at six yards’ distance, narrowlymissing my brother. The less courageous of the robbers made off, andhis companion followed him, cursing his cowardice. They both stopped insight down the lane, where the third man lay insensible.“Take this!” said the slender lady, and she gave my brother herrevolver.“Go back to the chaise,” said my brother, wiping the blood from hissplit lip.She turned without a word—they were both panting—and they went back towhere the lady in white struggled to hold back the frightened pony.The robbers had evidently had enough of it. When my brother lookedagain they were retreating.“I’ll sit here,” said my brother, “if I may”; and he got upon the emptyfront seat. The lady looked over her shoulder.“Give me the reins,” she said, and laid the whip along the pony’s side.In another moment a bend in the road hid the three men from mybrother’s eyes.So, quite unexpectedly, my brother found himself, panting, with a cutmouth, a bruised jaw, and bloodstained knuckles, driving along anunknown lane with these two women.He learned they were the wife and the younger sister of a surgeonliving at Stanmore, who had come in the small hours from a dangerouscase at Pinner, and heard at some railway station on his way of theMartian advance. He had hurried home, roused the women—their servanthad left them two days before—packed some provisions, put his revolverunder the seat—luckily for my brother—and told them to drive on toEdgware, with the idea of getting a train there. He stopped behind totell the neighbours. He would overtake them, he said, at about halfpast four in the morning, and now it was nearly nine and they had seennothing of him. They could not stop in Edgware because of the growingtraffic through the place, and so they had come into this side lane.That was the story they told my brother in fragments when presentlythey stopped again, nearer to New Barnet. He promised to stay withthem, at least until they could determine what to do, or until themissing man arrived, and professed to be an expert shot with therevolver—a weapon strange to him—in order to give them confidence.They made a sort of encampment by the wayside, and the pony becamehappy in the hedge. He told them of his own escape out of London, andall that he knew of these Martians and their ways. The sun crept higherin the sky, and after a time their talk died out and gave place to anuneasy state of anticipation. Several wayfarers came along the lane,and of these my brother gathered such news as he could. Every brokenanswer he had deepened his impression of the great disaster that hadcome on humanity, deepened his persuasion of the immediate necessityfor prosecuting this flight. He urged the matter upon them.“We have money,” said the slender woman, and hesitated.Her eyes met my brother’s, and her hesitation ended.“So have I,” said my brother.She explained that they had as much as thirty pounds in gold, besides afive-pound note, and suggested that with that they might get upon atrain at St. Albans or New Barnet. My brother thought that washopeless, seeing the fury of the Londoners to crowd upon the trains,and broached his own idea of striking across Essex towards Harwich andthence escaping from the country altogether.Mrs. Elphinstone—that was the name of the woman in white—would listento no reasoning, and kept calling upon “George”; but her sister-in-lawwas astonishingly quiet and deliberate, and at last agreed to mybrother’s suggestion. So, designing to cross the Great North Road, theywent on towards Barnet, my brother leading the pony to save it as muchas possible. As the sun crept up the sky the day became excessivelyhot, and under foot a thick, whitish sand grew burning and blinding, sothat they travelled only very slowly. The hedges were grey with dust.And as they advanced towards Barnet a tumultuous murmuring grewstronger.They began to meet more people. For the most part these were staringbefore them, murmuring indistinct questions, jaded, haggard, unclean.One man in evening dress passed them on foot, his eyes on the ground.They heard his voice, and, looking back at him, saw one hand clutchedin his hair and the other beating invisible things. His paroxysm ofrage over, he went on his way without once looking back.As my brother’s party went on towards the crossroads to the south ofBarnet they saw a woman approaching the road across some fields ontheir left, carrying a child and with two other children; and thenpassed a man in dirty black, with a thick stick in one hand and a smallportmanteau in the other. Then round the corner of the lane, frombetween the villas that guarded it at its confluence with the highroad, came a little cart drawn by a sweating black pony and driven by asallow youth in a bowler hat, grey with dust. There were three girls,East End factory girls, and a couple of little children crowded in thecart.“This’ll tike us rahnd Edgware?” asked the driver, wild-eyed,white-faced; and when my brother told him it would if he turned to theleft, he whipped up at once without the formality of thanks.My brother noticed a pale grey smoke or haze rising among the houses infront of them, and veiling the white façade of a terrace beyond theroad that appeared between the backs of the villas. Mrs. Elphinstonesuddenly cried out at a number of tongues of smoky red flame leaping upabove the houses in front of them against the hot, blue sky. Thetumultuous noise resolved itself now into the disorderly mingling ofmany voices, the gride of many wheels, the creaking of waggons, and thestaccato of hoofs. The lane came round sharply not fifty yards from thecrossroads.“Good heavens!” cried Mrs. Elphinstone. “What is this you are drivingus into?”My brother stopped.For the main road was a boiling stream of people, a torrent of humanbeings rushing northward, one pressing on another. A great bank ofdust, white and luminous in the blaze of the sun, made everythingwithin twenty feet of the ground grey and indistinct and wasperpetually renewed by the hurrying feet of a dense crowd of horses andof men and women on foot, and by the wheels of vehicles of everydescription.“Way!” my brother heard voices crying. “Make way!”It was like riding into the smoke of a fire to approach the meetingpoint of the lane and road; the crowd roared like a fire, and the dustwas hot and pungent. And, indeed, a little way up the road a villa wasburning and sending rolling masses of black smoke across the road toadd to the confusion.Two men came past them. Then a dirty woman, carrying a heavy bundle andweeping. A lost retriever dog, with hanging tongue, circled dubiouslyround them, scared and wretched, and fled at my brother’s threat.So much as they could see of the road Londonward between the houses tothe right was a tumultuous stream of dirty, hurrying people, pent inbetween the villas on either side; the black heads, the crowded forms,grew into distinctness as they rushed towards the corner, hurried past,and merged their individuality again in a receding multitude that wasswallowed up at last in a cloud of dust.“Go on! Go on!” cried the voices. “Way! Way!”One man’s hands pressed on the back of another. My brother stood at thepony’s head. Irresistibly attracted, he advanced slowly, pace by pace,down the lane.Edgware had been a scene of confusion, Chalk Farm a riotous tumult, butthis was a whole population in movement. It is hard to imagine thathost. It had no character of its own. The figures poured out past thecorner, and receded with their backs to the group in the lane. Alongthe margin came those who were on foot threatened by the wheels,stumbling in the ditches, blundering into one another.The carts and carriages crowded close upon one another, making littleway for those swifter and more impatient vehicles that darted forwardevery now and then when an opportunity showed itself of doing so,sending the people scattering against the fences and gates of thevillas.“Push on!” was the cry. “Push on! They are coming!”In one cart stood a blind man in the uniform of the Salvation Army,gesticulating with his crooked fingers and bawling, “Eternity!Eternity!” His voice was hoarse and very loud so that my brother couldhear him long after he was lost to sight in the dust. Some of thepeople who crowded in the carts whipped stupidly at their horses andquarrelled with other drivers; some sat motionless, staring at nothingwith miserable eyes; some gnawed their hands with thirst, or layprostrate in the bottoms of their conveyances. The horses’ bits werecovered with foam, their eyes bloodshot.There were cabs, carriages, shop-carts, waggons, beyond counting; amail cart, a road-cleaner’s cart marked “Vestry of St. Pancras,” a hugetimber waggon crowded with roughs. A brewer’s dray rumbled by with itstwo near wheels splashed with fresh blood.“Clear the way!” cried the voices. “Clear the way!”“Eter-nity! Eter-nity!” came echoing down the road.There were sad, haggard women tramping by, well dressed, with childrenthat cried and stumbled, their dainty clothes smothered in dust, theirweary faces smeared with tears. With many of these came men, sometimeshelpful, sometimes lowering and savage. Fighting side by side with thempushed some weary street outcast in faded black rags, wide-eyed,loud-voiced, and foul-mouthed. There were sturdy workmen thrustingtheir way along, wretched, unkempt men, clothed like clerks or shopmen,struggling spasmodically; a wounded soldier my brother noticed, mendressed in the clothes of railway porters, one wretched creature in anightshirt with a coat thrown over it.But varied as its composition was, certain things all that host had incommon. There were fear and pain on their faces, and fear behind them.A tumult up the road, a quarrel for a place in a waggon, sent the wholehost of them quickening their pace; even a man so scared and brokenthat his knees bent under him was galvanised for a moment into renewedactivity. The heat and dust had already been at work upon thismultitude. Their skins were dry, their lips black and cracked. Theywere all thirsty, weary, and footsore. And amid the various cries oneheard disputes, reproaches, groans of weariness and fatigue; the voicesof most of them were hoarse and weak. Through it all ran a refrain:“Way! Way! The Martians are coming!”Few stopped and came aside from that flood. The lane opened slantinglyinto the main road with a narrow opening, and had a delusive appearanceof coming from the direction of London. Yet a kind of eddy of peopledrove into its mouth; weaklings elbowed out of the stream, who for themost part rested but a moment before plunging into it again. A littleway down the lane, with two friends bending over him, lay a man with abare leg, wrapped about with bloody rags. He was a lucky man to havefriends.A little old man, with a grey military moustache and a filthy blackfrock coat, limped out and sat down beside the trap, removed hisboot—his sock was blood-stained—shook out a pebble, and hobbled onagain; and then a little girl of eight or nine, all alone, threwherself under the hedge close by my brother, weeping.“I can’t go on! I can’t go on!”My brother woke from his torpor of astonishment and lifted her up,speaking gently to her, and carried her to Miss Elphinstone. So soon asmy brother touched her she became quite still, as if frightened.“Ellen!” shrieked a woman in the crowd, with tears in hervoice—“Ellen!” And the child suddenly darted away from my brother,crying “Mother!”“They are coming,” said a man on horseback, riding past along the lane.“Out of the way, there!” bawled a coachman, towering high; and mybrother saw a closed carriage turning into the lane.The people crushed back on one another to avoid the horse. My brotherpushed the pony and chaise back into the hedge, and the man drove byand stopped at the turn of the way. It was a carriage, with a pole fora pair of horses, but only one was in the traces. My brother saw dimlythrough the dust that two men lifted out something on a white stretcherand put it gently on the grass beneath the privet hedge.One of the men came running to my brother.“Where is there any water?” he said. “He is dying fast, and verythirsty. It is Lord Garrick.”“Lord Garrick!” said my brother; “the Chief Justice?”“The water?” he said.“There may be a tap,” said my brother, “in some of the houses. We haveno water. I dare not leave my people.”The man pushed against the crowd towards the gate of the corner house.“Go on!” said the people, thrusting at him. “They are coming! Go on!”Then my brother’s attention was distracted by a bearded, eagle-facedman lugging a small handbag, which split even as my brother’s eyesrested on it and disgorged a mass of sovereigns that seemed to break upinto separate coins as it struck the ground. They rolled hither andthither among the struggling feet of men and horses. The man stoppedand looked stupidly at the heap, and the shaft of a cab struck hisshoulder and sent him reeling. He gave a shriek and dodged back, and acartwheel shaved him narrowly.“Way!” cried the men all about him. “Make way!”So soon as the cab had passed, he flung himself, with both hands open,upon the heap of coins, and began thrusting handfuls in his pocket. Ahorse rose close upon him, and in another moment, half rising, he hadbeen borne down under the horse’s hoofs.“Stop!” screamed my brother, and pushing a woman out of his way, triedto clutch the bit of the horse.Before he could get to it, he heard a scream under the wheels, and sawthrough the dust the rim passing over the poor wretch’s back. Thedriver of the cart slashed his whip at my brother, who ran round behindthe cart. The multitudinous shouting confused his ears. The man waswrithing in the dust among his scattered money, unable to rise, for thewheel had broken his back, and his lower limbs lay limp and dead. Mybrother stood up and yelled at the next driver, and a man on a blackhorse came to his assistance.“Get him out of the road,” said he; and, clutching the man’s collarwith his free hand, my brother lugged him sideways. But he stillclutched after his money, and regarded my brother fiercely, hammeringat his arm with a handful of gold. “Go on! Go on!” shouted angry voicesbehind. “Way! Way!”There was a smash as the pole of a carriage crashed into the cart thatthe man on horseback stopped. My brother looked up, and the man withthe gold twisted his head round and bit the wrist that held his collar.There was a concussion, and the black horse came staggering sideways,and the carthorse pushed beside it. A hoof missed my brother’s foot bya hair’s breadth. He released his grip on the fallen man and jumpedback. He saw anger change to terror on the face of the poor wretch onthe ground, and in a moment he was hidden and my brother was bornebackward and carried past the entrance of the lane, and had to fighthard in the torrent to recover it.He saw Miss Elphinstone covering her eyes, and a little child, with alla child’s want of sympathetic imagination, staring with dilated eyes ata dusty something that lay black and still, ground and crushed underthe rolling wheels. “Let us go back!” he shouted, and began turning thepony round. “We cannot cross this—hell,” he said and they went back ahundred yards the way they had come, until the fighting crowd washidden. As they passed the bend in the lane my brother saw the face ofthe dying man in the ditch under the privet, deadly white and drawn,and shining with perspiration. The two women sat silent, crouching intheir seat and shivering.Then beyond the bend my brother stopped again. Miss Elphinstone waswhite and pale, and her sister-in-law sat weeping, too wretched even tocall upon “George.” My brother was horrified and perplexed. So soon asthey had retreated he realised how urgent and unavoidable it was toattempt this crossing. He turned to Miss Elphinstone, suddenlyresolute.“We must go that way,” he said, and led the pony round again.For the second time that day this girl proved her quality. To forcetheir way into the torrent of people, my brother plunged into thetraffic and held back a cab horse, while she drove the pony across itshead. A waggon locked wheels for a moment and ripped a long splinterfrom the chaise. In another moment they were caught and swept forwardby the stream. My brother, with the cabman’s whip marks red across hisface and hands, scrambled into the chaise and took the reins from her.“Point the revolver at the man behind,” he said, giving it to her, “ifhe presses us too hard. No!—point it at his horse.”Then he began to look out for a chance of edging to the right acrossthe road. But once in the stream he seemed to lose volition, to becomea part of that dusty rout. They swept through Chipping Barnet with thetorrent; they were nearly a mile beyond the centre of the town beforethey had fought across to the opposite side of the way. It was din andconfusion indescribable; but in and beyond the town the road forksrepeatedly, and this to some extent relieved the stress.They struck eastward through Hadley, and there on either side of theroad, and at another place farther on they came upon a great multitudeof people drinking at the stream, some fighting to come at the water.And farther on, from a lull near East Barnet, they saw two trainsrunning slowly one after the other without signal or order—trainsswarming with people, with men even among the coals behind theengines—going northward along the Great Northern Railway. My brothersupposes they must have filled outside London, for at that time thefurious terror of the people had rendered the central terminiimpossible.Near this place they halted for the rest of the afternoon, for theviolence of the day had already utterly exhausted all three of them.They began to suffer the beginnings of hunger; the night was cold, andnone of them dared to sleep. And in the evening many people camehurrying along the road nearby their stopping place, fleeing fromunknown dangers before them, and going in the direction from which mybrother had come.XVII.THE “THUNDER CHILD”.Had the Martians aimed only at destruction, they might on Monday haveannihilated the entire population of London, as it spread itself slowlythrough the home counties. Not only along the road through Barnet, butalso through Edgware and Waltham Abbey, and along the roads eastward toSouthend and Shoeburyness, and south of the Thames to Deal andBroadstairs, poured the same frantic rout. If one could have hung thatJune morning in a balloon in the blazing blue above London everynorthward and eastward road running out of the tangled maze of streetswould have seemed stippled black with the streaming fugitives, each dota human agony of terror and physical distress. I have set forth atlength in the last chapter my brother’s account of the road throughChipping Barnet, in order that my readers may realise how that swarmingof black dots appeared to one of those concerned. Never before in thehistory of the world had such a mass of human beings moved and sufferedtogether. The legendary hosts of Goths and Huns, the hugest armies Asiahas ever seen, would have been but a drop in that current. And this wasno disciplined march; it was a stampede—a stampede gigantic andterrible—without order and without a goal, six million people unarmedand unprovisioned, driving headlong. It was the beginning of the routof civilisation, of the massacre of mankind.Directly below him the balloonist would have seen the network ofstreets far and wide, houses, churches, squares, crescents,gardens—already derelict—spread out like a huge map, and in thesouthward _blotted_. Over Ealing, Richmond, Wimbledon, it would haveseemed as if some monstrous pen had flung ink upon the chart. Steadily,incessantly, each black splash grew and spread, shooting outramifications this way and that, now banking itself against risingground, now pouring swiftly over a crest into a new-found valley,exactly as a gout of ink would spread itself upon blotting paper.And beyond, over the blue hills that rise southward of the river, theglittering Martians went to and fro, calmly and methodically spreadingtheir poison cloud over this patch of country and then over that,laying it again with their steam jets when it had served its purpose,and taking possession of the conquered country. They do not seem tohave aimed at extermination so much as at complete demoralisation andthe destruction of any opposition. They exploded any stores of powderthey came upon, cut every telegraph, and wrecked the railways here andthere. They were hamstringing mankind. They seemed in no hurry toextend the field of their operations, and did not come beyond thecentral part of London all that day. It is possible that a veryconsiderable number of people in London stuck to their houses throughMonday morning. Certain it is that many died at home suffocated by theBlack Smoke.Until about midday the Pool of London was an astonishing scene.Steamboats and shipping of all sorts lay there, tempted by the enormoussums of money offered by fugitives, and it is said that many who swamout to these vessels were thrust off with boathooks and drowned. Aboutone o’clock in the afternoon the thinning remnant of a cloud of theblack vapour appeared between the arches of Blackfriars Bridge. At thatthe Pool became a scene of mad confusion, fighting, and collision, andfor some time a multitude of boats and barges jammed in the northernarch of the Tower Bridge, and the sailors and lightermen had to fightsavagely against the people who swarmed upon them from the riverfront.People were actually clambering down the piers of the bridge fromabove.When, an hour later, a Martian appeared beyond the Clock Tower andwaded down the river, nothing but wreckage floated above Limehouse.Of the falling of the fifth cylinder I have presently to tell. Thesixth star fell at Wimbledon. My brother, keeping watch beside thewomen in the chaise in a meadow, saw the green flash of it far beyondthe hills. On Tuesday the little party, still set upon getting acrossthe sea, made its way through the swarming country towards Colchester.The news that the Martians were now in possession of the whole ofLondon was confirmed. They had been seen at Highgate, and even, it wassaid, at Neasden. But they did not come into my brother’s view untilthe morrow.That day the scattered multitudes began to realise the urgent need ofprovisions. As they grew hungry the rights of property ceased to beregarded. Farmers were out to defend their cattle-sheds, granaries, andripening root crops with arms in their hands. A number of people now,like my brother, had their faces eastward, and there were somedesperate souls even going back towards London to get food. These werechiefly people from the northern suburbs, whose knowledge of the BlackSmoke came by hearsay. He heard that about half the members of thegovernment had gathered at Birmingham, and that enormous quantities ofhigh explosives were being prepared to be used in automatic minesacross the Midland counties.He was also told that the Midland Railway Company had replaced thedesertions of the first day’s panic, had resumed traffic, and wasrunning northward trains from St. Albans to relieve the congestion ofthe home counties. There was also a placard in Chipping Ongarannouncing that large stores of flour were available in the northerntowns and that within twenty-four hours bread would be distributedamong the starving people in the neighbourhood. But this intelligencedid not deter him from the plan of escape he had formed, and the threepressed eastward all day, and heard no more of the bread distributionthan this promise. Nor, as a matter of fact, did anyone else hear moreof it. That night fell the seventh star, falling upon Primrose Hill. Itfell while Miss Elphinstone was watching, for she took that dutyalternately with my brother. She saw it.On Wednesday the three fugitives—they had passed the night in a fieldof unripe wheat—reached Chelmsford, and there a body of theinhabitants, calling itself the Committee of Public Supply, seized thepony as provisions, and would give nothing in exchange for it but thepromise of a share in it the next day. Here there were rumours ofMartians at Epping, and news of the destruction of Waltham Abbey PowderMills in a vain attempt to blow up one of the invaders.People were watching for Martians here from the church towers. Mybrother, very luckily for him as it chanced, preferred to push on atonce to the coast rather than wait for food, although all three of themwere very hungry. By midday they passed through Tillingham, which,strangely enough, seemed to be quite silent and deserted, save for afew furtive plunderers hunting for food. Near Tillingham they suddenlycame in sight of the sea, and the most amazing crowd of shipping of allsorts that it is possible to imagine.For after the sailors could no longer come up the Thames, they came onto the Essex coast, to Harwich and Walton and Clacton, and afterwardsto Foulness and Shoebury, to bring off the people. They lay in a hugesickle-shaped curve that vanished into mist at last towards the Naze.Close inshore was a multitude of fishing smacks—English, Scotch,French, Dutch, and Swedish; steam launches from the Thames, yachts,electric boats; and beyond were ships of larger burden, a multitude offilthy colliers, trim merchantmen, cattle ships, passenger boats,petroleum tanks, ocean tramps, an old white transport even, neat whiteand grey liners from Southampton and Hamburg; and along the blue coastacross the Blackwater my brother could make out dimly a dense swarm ofboats chaffering with the people on the beach, a swarm which alsoextended up the Blackwater almost to Maldon.About a couple of miles out lay an ironclad, very low in the water,almost, to my brother’s perception, like a water-logged ship. This wasthe ram _Thunder Child_. It was the only warship in sight, but far awayto the right over the smooth surface of the sea—for that day there wasa dead calm—lay a serpent of black smoke to mark the next ironclads ofthe Channel Fleet, which hovered in an extended line, steam up andready for action, across the Thames estuary during the course of theMartian conquest, vigilant and yet powerless to prevent it.At the sight of the sea, Mrs. Elphinstone, in spite of the assurancesof her sister-in-law, gave way to panic. She had never been out ofEngland before, she would rather die than trust herself friendless in aforeign country, and so forth. She seemed, poor woman, to imagine thatthe French and the Martians might prove very similar. She had beengrowing increasingly hysterical, fearful, and depressed during the twodays’ journeyings. Her great idea was to return to Stanmore. Things hadbeen always well and safe at Stanmore. They would find George atStanmore....It was with the greatest difficulty they could get her down to thebeach, where presently my brother succeeded in attracting the attentionof some men on a paddle steamer from the Thames. They sent a boat anddrove a bargain for thirty-six pounds for the three. The steamer wasgoing, these men said, to Ostend.It was about two o’clock when my brother, having paid their fares atthe gangway, found himself safely aboard the steamboat with hischarges. There was food aboard, albeit at exorbitant prices, and thethree of them contrived to eat a meal on one of the seats forward.There were already a couple of score of passengers aboard, some of whomhad expended their last money in securing a passage, but the captainlay off the Blackwater until five in the afternoon, picking uppassengers until the seated decks were even dangerously crowded. Hewould probably have remained longer had it not been for the sound ofguns that began about that hour in the south. As if in answer, theironclad seaward fired a small gun and hoisted a string of flags. A jetof smoke sprang out of her funnels.Some of the passengers were of opinion that this firing came fromShoeburyness, until it was noticed that it was growing louder. At thesame time, far away in the southeast the masts and upperworks of threeironclads rose one after the other out of the sea, beneath clouds ofblack smoke. But my brother’s attention speedily reverted to thedistant firing in the south. He fancied he saw a column of smoke risingout of the distant grey haze.The little steamer was already flapping her way eastward of the bigcrescent of shipping, and the low Essex coast was growing blue andhazy, when a Martian appeared, small and faint in the remote distance,advancing along the muddy coast from the direction of Foulness. At thatthe captain on the bridge swore at the top of his voice with fear andanger at his own delay, and the paddles seemed infected with histerror. Every soul aboard stood at the bulwarks or on the seats of thesteamer and stared at that distant shape, higher than the trees orchurch towers inland, and advancing with a leisurely parody of a humanstride.It was the first Martian my brother had seen, and he stood, more amazedthan terrified, watching this Titan advancing deliberately towards theshipping, wading farther and farther into the water as the coast fellaway. Then, far away beyond the Crouch, came another, striding oversome stunted trees, and then yet another, still farther off, wadingdeeply through a shiny mudflat that seemed to hang halfway up betweensea and sky. They were all stalking seaward, as if to intercept theescape of the multitudinous vessels that were crowded between Foulnessand the Naze. In spite of the throbbing exertions of the engines of thelittle paddle-boat, and the pouring foam that her wheels flung behindher, she receded with terrifying slowness from this ominous advance.Glancing northwestward, my brother saw the large crescent of shippingalready writhing with the approaching terror; one ship passing behindanother, another coming round from broadside to end on, steamshipswhistling and giving off volumes of steam, sails being let out,launches rushing hither and thither. He was so fascinated by this andby the creeping danger away to the left that he had no eyes foranything seaward. And then a swift movement of the steamboat (she hadsuddenly come round to avoid being run down) flung him headlong fromthe seat upon which he was standing. There was a shouting all abouthim, a trampling of feet, and a cheer that seemed to be answeredfaintly. The steamboat lurched and rolled him over upon his hands.He sprang to his feet and saw to starboard, and not a hundred yardsfrom their heeling, pitching boat, a vast iron bulk like the blade of aplough tearing through the water, tossing it on either side in hugewaves of foam that leaped towards the steamer, flinging her paddleshelplessly in the air, and then sucking her deck down almost to thewaterline.A douche of spray blinded my brother for a moment. When his eyes wereclear again he saw the monster had passed and was rushing landward. Bigiron upperworks rose out of this headlong structure, and from that twinfunnels projected and spat a smoking blast shot with fire. It was thetorpedo ram, _Thunder Child_, steaming headlong, coming to the rescueof the threatened shipping.Keeping his footing on the heaving deck by clutching the bulwarks, mybrother looked past this charging leviathan at the Martians again, andhe saw the three of them now close together, and standing so far out tosea that their tripod supports were almost entirely submerged. Thussunken, and seen in remote perspective, they appeared far lessformidable than the huge iron bulk in whose wake the steamer waspitching so helplessly. It would seem they were regarding this newantagonist with astonishment. To their intelligence, it may be, thegiant was even such another as themselves. The _Thunder Child_ fired nogun, but simply drove full speed towards them. It was probably her notfiring that enabled her to get so near the enemy as she did. They didnot know what to make of her. One shell, and they would have sent herto the bottom forthwith with the Heat-Ray.She was steaming at such a pace that in a minute she seemed halfwaybetween the steamboat and the Martians—a diminishing black bulk againstthe receding horizontal expanse of the Essex coast.Suddenly the foremost Martian lowered his tube and discharged acanister of the black gas at the ironclad. It hit her larboard side andglanced off in an inky jet that rolled away to seaward, an unfoldingtorrent of Black Smoke, from which the ironclad drove clear. To thewatchers from the steamer, low in the water and with the sun in theireyes, it seemed as though she were already among the Martians.They saw the gaunt figures separating and rising out of the water asthey retreated shoreward, and one of them raised the camera-likegenerator of the Heat-Ray. He held it pointing obliquely downward, anda bank of steam sprang from the water at its touch. It must have driventhrough the iron of the ship’s side like a white-hot iron rod throughpaper.A flicker of flame went up through the rising steam, and then theMartian reeled and staggered. In another moment he was cut down, and agreat body of water and steam shot high in the air. The guns of the_Thunder Child_ sounded through the reek, going off one after theother, and one shot splashed the water high close by the steamer,ricocheted towards the other flying ships to the north, and smashed asmack to matchwood.But no one heeded that very much. At the sight of the Martian’scollapse the captain on the bridge yelled inarticulately, and all thecrowding passengers on the steamer’s stern shouted together. And thenthey yelled again. For, surging out beyond the white tumult, drovesomething long and black, the flames streaming from its middle parts,its ventilators and funnels spouting fire.She was alive still; the steering gear, it seems, was intact and herengines working. She headed straight for a second Martian, and waswithin a hundred yards of him when the Heat-Ray came to bear. Then witha violent thud, a blinding flash, her decks, her funnels, leapedupward. The Martian staggered with the violence of her explosion, andin another moment the flaming wreckage, still driving forward with theimpetus of its pace, had struck him and crumpled him up like a thing ofcardboard. My brother shouted involuntarily. A boiling tumult of steamhid everything again.“Two!” yelled the captain.Everyone was shouting. The whole steamer from end to end rang withfrantic cheering that was taken up first by one and then by all in thecrowding multitude of ships and boats that was driving out to sea.The steam hung upon the water for many minutes, hiding the thirdMartian and the coast altogether. And all this time the boat waspaddling steadily out to sea and away from the fight; and when at lastthe confusion cleared, the drifting bank of black vapour intervened,and nothing of the _Thunder Child_ could be made out, nor could thethird Martian be seen. But the ironclads to seaward were now quiteclose and standing in towards shore past the steamboat.The little vessel continued to beat its way seaward, and the ironcladsreceded slowly towards the coast, which was hidden still by a marbledbank of vapour, part steam, part black gas, eddying and combining inthe strangest way. The fleet of refugees was scattering to thenortheast; several smacks were sailing between the ironclads and thesteamboat. After a time, and before they reached the sinking cloudbank, the warships turned northward, and then abruptly went about andpassed into the thickening haze of evening southward. The coast grewfaint, and at last indistinguishable amid the low banks of clouds thatwere gathering about the sinking sun.Then suddenly out of the golden haze of the sunset came the vibrationof guns, and a form of black shadows moving. Everyone struggled to therail of the steamer and peered into the blinding furnace of the west,but nothing was to be distinguished clearly. A mass of smoke roseslanting and barred the face of the sun. The steamboat throbbed on itsway through an interminable suspense.The sun sank into grey clouds, the sky flushed and darkened, theevening star trembled into sight. It was deep twilight when the captaincried out and pointed. My brother strained his eyes. Something rushedup into the sky out of the greyness—rushed slantingly upward and veryswiftly into the luminous clearness above the clouds in the westernsky; something flat and broad, and very large, that swept round in avast curve, grew smaller, sank slowly, and vanished again into the greymystery of the night. And as it flew it rained down darkness upon theland.BOOK TWOTHE EARTH UNDER THE MARTIANS.I.UNDER FOOT.In the first book I have wandered so much from my own adventures totell of the experiences of my brother that all through the last twochapters I and the curate have been lurking in the empty house atHalliford whither we fled to escape the Black Smoke. There I willresume. We stopped there all Sunday night and all the next day—the dayof the panic—in a little island of daylight, cut off by the Black Smokefrom the rest of the world. We could do nothing but wait in achinginactivity during those two weary days.My mind was occupied by anxiety for my wife. I figured her atLeatherhead, terrified, in danger, mourning me already as a dead man. Ipaced the rooms and cried aloud when I thought of how I was cut offfrom her, of all that might happen to her in my absence. My cousin Iknew was brave enough for any emergency, but he was not the sort of manto realise danger quickly, to rise promptly. What was needed now wasnot bravery, but circumspection. My only consolation was to believethat the Martians were moving Londonward and away from her. Such vagueanxieties keep the mind sensitive and painful. I grew very weary andirritable with the curate’s perpetual ejaculations; I tired of thesight of his selfish despair. After some ineffectual remonstrance Ikept away from him, staying in a room—evidently a children’sschoolroom—containing globes, forms, and copybooks. When he followed methither, I went to a box room at the top of the house and, in order tobe alone with my aching miseries, locked myself in.We were hopelessly hemmed in by the Black Smoke all that day and themorning of the next. There were signs of people in the next house onSunday evening—a face at a window and moving lights, and later theslamming of a door. But I do not know who these people were, nor whatbecame of them. We saw nothing of them next day. The Black Smokedrifted slowly riverward all through Monday morning, creeping nearerand nearer to us, driving at last along the roadway outside the housethat hid us.A Martian came across the fields about midday, laying the stuff with ajet of superheated steam that hissed against the walls, smashed all thewindows it touched, and scalded the curate’s hand as he fled out of thefront room. When at last we crept across the sodden rooms and lookedout again, the country northward was as though a black snowstorm hadpassed over it. Looking towards the river, we were astonished to see anunaccountable redness mingling with the black of the scorched meadows.For a time we did not see how this change affected our position, savethat we were relieved of our fear of the Black Smoke. But later Iperceived that we were no longer hemmed in, that now we might get away.So soon as I realised that the way of escape was open, my dream ofaction returned. But the curate was lethargic, unreasonable.“We are safe here,” he repeated; “safe here.”I resolved to leave him—would that I had! Wiser now for theartilleryman’s teaching, I sought out food and drink. I had found oiland rags for my burns, and I also took a hat and a flannel shirt that Ifound in one of the bedrooms. When it was clear to him that I meant togo alone—had reconciled myself to going alone—he suddenly rousedhimself to come. And all being quiet throughout the afternoon, westarted about five o’clock, as I should judge, along the blackened roadto Sunbury.In Sunbury, and at intervals along the road, were dead bodies lying incontorted attitudes, horses as well as men, overturned carts andluggage, all covered thickly with black dust. That pall of cinderypowder made me think of what I had read of the destruction of Pompeii.We got to Hampton Court without misadventure, our minds full of strangeand unfamiliar appearances, and at Hampton Court our eyes were relievedto find a patch of green that had escaped the suffocating drift. Wewent through Bushey Park, with its deer going to and fro under thechestnuts, and some men and women hurrying in the distance towardsHampton, and so we came to Twickenham. These were the first people wesaw.Away across the road the woods beyond Ham and Petersham were stillafire. Twickenham was uninjured by either Heat-Ray or Black Smoke, andthere were more people about here, though none could give us news. Forthe most part they were like ourselves, taking advantage of a lull toshift their quarters. I have an impression that many of the houses herewere still occupied by scared inhabitants, too frightened even forflight. Here too the evidence of a hasty rout was abundant along theroad. I remember most vividly three smashed bicycles in a heap, poundedinto the road by the wheels of subsequent carts. We crossed RichmondBridge about half past eight. We hurried across the exposed bridge, ofcourse, but I noticed floating down the stream a number of red masses,some many feet across. I did not know what these were—there was no timefor scrutiny—and I put a more horrible interpretation on them than theydeserved. Here again on the Surrey side were black dust that had oncebeen smoke, and dead bodies—a heap near the approach to the station;but we had no glimpse of the Martians until we were some way towardsBarnes.We saw in the blackened distance a group of three people running down aside street towards the river, but otherwise it seemed deserted. Up thehill Richmond town was burning briskly; outside the town of Richmondthere was no trace of the Black Smoke.Then suddenly, as we approached Kew, came a number of people running,and the upperworks of a Martian fighting-machine loomed in sight overthe housetops, not a hundred yards away from us. We stood aghast at ourdanger, and had the Martian looked down we must immediately haveperished. We were so terrified that we dared not go on, but turnedaside and hid in a shed in a garden. There the curate crouched, weepingsilently, and refusing to stir again.But my fixed idea of reaching Leatherhead would not let me rest, and inthe twilight I ventured out again. I went through a shrubbery, andalong a passage beside a big house standing in its own grounds, and soemerged upon the road towards Kew. The curate I left in the shed, buthe came hurrying after me.That second start was the most foolhardy thing I ever did. For it wasmanifest the Martians were about us. No sooner had the curate overtakenme than we saw either the fighting-machine we had seen before oranother, far away across the meadows in the direction of Kew Lodge.Four or five little black figures hurried before it across thegreen-grey of the field, and in a moment it was evident this Martianpursued them. In three strides he was among them, and they ranradiating from his feet in all directions. He used no Heat-Ray todestroy them, but picked them up one by one. Apparently he tossed theminto the great metallic carrier which projected behind him, much as aworkman’s basket hangs over his shoulder.It was the first time I realised that the Martians might have any otherpurpose than destruction with defeated humanity. We stood for a momentpetrified, then turned and fled through a gate behind us into a walledgarden, fell into, rather than found, a fortunate ditch, and lay there,scarce daring to whisper to each other until the stars were out.I suppose it was nearly eleven o’clock before we gathered courage tostart again, no longer venturing into the road, but sneaking alonghedgerows and through plantations, and watching keenly through thedarkness, he on the right and I on the left, for the Martians, whoseemed to be all about us. In one place we blundered upon a scorchedand blackened area, now cooling and ashen, and a number of scattereddead bodies of men, burned horribly about the heads and trunks but withtheir legs and boots mostly intact; and of dead horses, fifty feet,perhaps, behind a line of four ripped guns and smashed gun carriages.Sheen, it seemed, had escaped destruction, but the place was silent anddeserted. Here we happened on no dead, though the night was too darkfor us to see into the side roads of the place. In Sheen my companionsuddenly complained of faintness and thirst, and we decided to try oneof the houses.The first house we entered, after a little difficulty with the window,was a small semi-detached villa, and I found nothing eatable left inthe place but some mouldy cheese. There was, however, water to drink;and I took a hatchet, which promised to be useful in our nexthouse-breaking.We then crossed to a place where the road turns towards Mortlake. Herethere stood a white house within a walled garden, and in the pantry ofthis domicile we found a store of food—two loaves of bread in a pan, anuncooked steak, and the half of a ham. I give this catalogue soprecisely because, as it happened, we were destined to subsist uponthis store for the next fortnight. Bottled beer stood under a shelf,and there were two bags of haricot beans and some limp lettuces. Thispantry opened into a kind of wash-up kitchen, and in this was firewood;there was also a cupboard, in which we found nearly a dozen ofburgundy, tinned soups and salmon, and two tins of biscuits.We sat in the adjacent kitchen in the dark—for we dared not strike alight—and ate bread and ham, and drank beer out of the same bottle. Thecurate, who was still timorous and restless, was now, oddly enough, forpushing on, and I was urging him to keep up his strength by eating whenthe thing happened that was to imprison us.“It can’t be midnight yet,” I said, and then came a blinding glare ofvivid green light. Everything in the kitchen leaped out, clearlyvisible in green and black, and vanished again. And then followed sucha concussion as I have never heard before or since. So close on theheels of this as to seem instantaneous came a thud behind me, a clashof glass, a crash and rattle of falling masonry all about us, and theplaster of the ceiling came down upon us, smashing into a multitude offragments upon our heads. I was knocked headlong across the flooragainst the oven handle and stunned. I was insensible for a long time,the curate told me, and when I came to we were in darkness again, andhe, with a face wet, as I found afterwards, with blood from a cutforehead, was dabbing water over me.For some time I could not recollect what had happened. Then things cameto me slowly. A bruise on my temple asserted itself.“Are you better?” asked the curate in a whisper.At last I answered him. I sat up.“Don’t move,” he said. “The floor is covered with smashed crockery fromthe dresser. You can’t possibly move without making a noise, and Ifancy _they_ are outside.”We both sat quite silent, so that we could scarcely hear each otherbreathing. Everything seemed deadly still, but once something near us,some plaster or broken brickwork, slid down with a rumbling sound.Outside and very near was an intermittent, metallic rattle.“That!” said the curate, when presently it happened again.“Yes,” I said. “But what is it?”“A Martian!” said the curate.I listened again.“It was not like the Heat-Ray,” I said, and for a time I was inclinedto think one of the great fighting-machines had stumbled against thehouse, as I had seen one stumble against the tower of SheppertonChurch.Our situation was so strange and incomprehensible that for three orfour hours, until the dawn came, we scarcely moved. And then the lightfiltered in, not through the window, which remained black, but througha triangular aperture between a beam and a heap of broken bricks in thewall behind us. The interior of the kitchen we now saw greyly for thefirst time.The window had been burst in by a mass of garden mould, which flowedover the table upon which we had been sitting and lay about our feet.Outside, the soil was banked high against the house. At the top of thewindow frame we could see an uprooted drainpipe. The floor was litteredwith smashed hardware; the end of the kitchen towards the house wasbroken into, and since the daylight shone in there, it was evident thegreater part of the house had collapsed. Contrasting vividly with thisruin was the neat dresser, stained in the fashion, pale green, and witha number of copper and tin vessels below it, the wallpaper imitatingblue and white tiles, and a couple of coloured supplements flutteringfrom the walls above the kitchen range.As the dawn grew clearer, we saw through the gap in the wall the bodyof a Martian, standing sentinel, I suppose, over the still glowingcylinder. At the sight of that we crawled as circumspectly as possibleout of the twilight of the kitchen into the darkness of the scullery.Abruptly the right interpretation dawned upon my mind.“The fifth cylinder,” I whispered, “the fifth shot from Mars, hasstruck this house and buried us under the ruins!”For a time the curate was silent, and then he whispered:“God have mercy upon us!”I heard him presently whimpering to himself.Save for that sound we lay quite still in the scullery; I for my partscarce dared breathe, and sat with my eyes fixed on the faint light ofthe kitchen door. I could just see the curate’s face, a dim, ovalshape, and his collar and cuffs. Outside there began a metallichammering, then a violent hooting, and then again, after a quietinterval, a hissing like the hissing of an engine. These noises, forthe most part problematical, continued intermittently, and seemed ifanything to increase in number as time wore on. Presently a measuredthudding and a vibration that made everything about us quiver and thevessels in the pantry ring and shift, began and continued. Once thelight was eclipsed, and the ghostly kitchen doorway became absolutelydark. For many hours we must have crouched there, silent and shivering,until our tired attention failed. . . .At last I found myself awake and very hungry. I am inclined to believewe must have spent the greater portion of a day before that awakening.My hunger was at a stride so insistent that it moved me to action. Itold the curate I was going to seek food, and felt my way towards thepantry. He made me no answer, but so soon as I began eating the faintnoise I made stirred him up and I heard him crawling after me.II.WHAT WE SAW FROM THE RUINED HOUSE.After eating we crept back to the scullery, and there I must have dozedagain, for when presently I looked round I was alone. The thuddingvibration continued with wearisome persistence. I whispered for thecurate several times, and at last felt my way to the door of thekitchen. It was still daylight, and I perceived him across the room,lying against the triangular hole that looked out upon the Martians.His shoulders were hunched, so that his head was hidden from me.I could hear a number of noises almost like those in an engine shed;and the place rocked with that beating thud. Through the aperture inthe wall I could see the top of a tree touched with gold and the warmblue of a tranquil evening sky. For a minute or so I remained watchingthe curate, and then I advanced, crouching and stepping with extremecare amid the broken crockery that littered the floor.I touched the curate’s leg, and he started so violently that a mass ofplaster went sliding down outside and fell with a loud impact. Igripped his arm, fearing he might cry out, and for a long time wecrouched motionless. Then I turned to see how much of our rampartremained. The detachment of the plaster had left a vertical slit openin the debris, and by raising myself cautiously across a beam I wasable to see out of this gap into what had been overnight a quietsuburban roadway. Vast, indeed, was the change that we beheld.The fifth cylinder must have fallen right into the midst of the housewe had first visited. The building had vanished, completely smashed,pulverised, and dispersed by the blow. The cylinder lay now far beneaththe original foundations—deep in a hole, already vastly larger than thepit I had looked into at Woking. The earth all round it had splashedunder that tremendous impact—“splashed” is the only word—and lay inheaped piles that hid the masses of the adjacent houses. It had behavedexactly like mud under the violent blow of a hammer. Our house hadcollapsed backward; the front portion, even on the ground floor, hadbeen destroyed completely; by a chance the kitchen and scullery hadescaped, and stood buried now under soil and ruins, closed in by tonsof earth on every side save towards the cylinder. Over that aspect wehung now on the very edge of the great circular pit the Martians wereengaged in making. The heavy beating sound was evidently just behindus, and ever and again a bright green vapour drove up like a veilacross our peephole.The cylinder was already opened in the centre of the pit, and on thefarther edge of the pit, amid the smashed and gravel-heaped shrubbery,one of the great fighting-machines, deserted by its occupant, stoodstiff and tall against the evening sky. At first I scarcely noticed thepit and the cylinder, although it has been convenient to describe themfirst, on account of the extraordinary glittering mechanism I saw busyin the excavation, and on account of the strange creatures that werecrawling slowly and painfully across the heaped mould near it.The mechanism it certainly was that held my attention first. It was oneof those complicated fabrics that have since been calledhandling-machines, and the study of which has already given such anenormous impetus to terrestrial invention. As it dawned upon me first,it presented a sort of metallic spider with five jointed, agile legs,and with an extraordinary number of jointed levers, bars, and reachingand clutching tentacles about its body. Most of its arms wereretracted, but with three long tentacles it was fishing out a number ofrods, plates, and bars which lined the covering and apparentlystrengthened the walls of the cylinder. These, as it extracted them,were lifted out and deposited upon a level surface of earth behind it.Its motion was so swift, complex, and perfect that at first I did notsee it as a machine, in spite of its metallic glitter. Thefighting-machines were coordinated and animated to an extraordinarypitch, but nothing to compare with this. People who have never seenthese structures, and have only the ill-imagined efforts of artists orthe imperfect descriptions of such eye-witnesses as myself to go upon,scarcely realise that living quality.I recall particularly the illustration of one of the first pamphlets togive a consecutive account of the war. The artist had evidently made ahasty study of one of the fighting-machines, and there his knowledgeended. He presented them as tilted, stiff tripods, without eitherflexibility or subtlety, and with an altogether misleading monotony ofeffect. The pamphlet containing these renderings had a considerablevogue, and I mention them here simply to warn the reader against theimpression they may have created. They were no more like the Martians Isaw in action than a Dutch doll is like a human being. To my mind, thepamphlet would have been much better without them.At first, I say, the handling-machine did not impress me as a machine,but as a crablike creature with a glittering integument, thecontrolling Martian whose delicate tentacles actuated its movementsseeming to be simply the equivalent of the crab’s cerebral portion. Butthen I perceived the resemblance of its grey-brown, shiny, leatheryintegument to that of the other sprawling bodies beyond, and the truenature of this dexterous workman dawned upon me. With that realisationmy interest shifted to those other creatures, the real Martians.Already I had had a transient impression of these, and the first nauseano longer obscured my observation. Moreover, I was concealed andmotionless, and under no urgency of action.They were, I now saw, the most unearthly creatures it is possible toconceive. They were huge round bodies—or, rather, heads—about four feetin diameter, each body having in front of it a face. This face had nonostrils—indeed, the Martians do not seem to have had any sense ofsmell, but it had a pair of very large dark-coloured eyes, and justbeneath this a kind of fleshy beak. In the back of this head or body—Iscarcely know how to speak of it—was the single tight tympanic surface,since known to be anatomically an ear, though it must have been almostuseless in our dense air. In a group round the mouth were sixteenslender, almost whiplike tentacles, arranged in two bunches of eighteach. These bunches have since been named rather aptly, by thatdistinguished anatomist, Professor Howes, the _hands_. Even as I sawthese Martians for the first time they seemed to be endeavouring toraise themselves on these hands, but of course, with the increasedweight of terrestrial conditions, this was impossible. There is reasonto suppose that on Mars they may have progressed upon them with somefacility.The internal anatomy, I may remark here, as dissection has since shown,was almost equally simple. The greater part of the structure was thebrain, sending enormous nerves to the eyes, ear, and tactile tentacles.Besides this were the bulky lungs, into which the mouth opened, and theheart and its vessels. The pulmonary distress caused by the denseratmosphere and greater gravitational attraction was only too evident inthe convulsive movements of the outer skin.And this was the sum of the Martian organs. Strange as it may seem to ahuman being, all the complex apparatus of digestion, which makes up thebulk of our bodies, did not exist in the Martians. They wereheads—merely heads. Entrails they had none. They did not eat, much lessdigest. Instead, they took the fresh, living blood of other creatures,and _injected_ it into their own veins. I have myself seen this beingdone, as I shall mention in its place. But, squeamish as I may seem, Icannot bring myself to describe what I could not endure even tocontinue watching. Let it suffice to say, blood obtained from a stillliving animal, in most cases from a human being, was run directly bymeans of a little pipette into the recipient canal. . . .The bare idea of this is no doubt horribly repulsive to us, but at thesame time I think that we should remember how repulsive our carnivoroushabits would seem to an intelligent rabbit.The physiological advantages of the practice of injection areundeniable, if one thinks of the tremendous waste of human time andenergy occasioned by eating and the digestive process. Our bodies arehalf made up of glands and tubes and organs, occupied in turningheterogeneous food into blood. The digestive processes and theirreaction upon the nervous system sap our strength and colour our minds.Men go happy or miserable as they have healthy or unhealthy livers, orsound gastric glands. But the Martians were lifted above all theseorganic fluctuations of mood and emotion.Their undeniable preference for men as their source of nourishment ispartly explained by the nature of the remains of the victims they hadbrought with them as provisions from Mars. These creatures, to judgefrom the shrivelled remains that have fallen into human hands, werebipeds with flimsy, silicious skeletons (almost like those of thesilicious sponges) and feeble musculature, standing about six feet highand having round, erect heads, and large eyes in flinty sockets. Two orthree of these seem to have been brought in each cylinder, and all werekilled before earth was reached. It was just as well for them, for themere attempt to stand upright upon our planet would have broken everybone in their bodies.And while I am engaged in this description, I may add in this placecertain further details which, although they were not all evident to usat the time, will enable the reader who is unacquainted with them toform a clearer picture of these offensive creatures.In three other points their physiology differed strangely from ours.Their organisms did not sleep, any more than the heart of man sleeps.Since they had no extensive muscular mechanism to recuperate, thatperiodical extinction was unknown to them. They had little or no senseof fatigue, it would seem. On earth they could never have moved withouteffort, yet even to the last they kept in action. In twenty-four hoursthey did twenty-four hours of work, as even on earth is perhaps thecase with the ants.In the next place, wonderful as it seems in a sexual world, theMartians were absolutely without sex, and therefore without any of thetumultuous emotions that arise from that difference among men. A youngMartian, there can now be no dispute, was really born upon earth duringthe war, and it was found attached to its parent, partially _budded_off, just as young lilybulbs bud off, or like the young animals in thefresh-water polyp.In man, in all the higher terrestrial animals, such a method ofincrease has disappeared; but even on this earth it was certainly theprimitive method. Among the lower animals, up even to those firstcousins of the vertebrated animals, the Tunicates, the two processesoccur side by side, but finally the sexual method superseded itscompetitor altogether. On Mars, however, just the reverse hasapparently been the case.It is worthy of remark that a certain speculative writer ofquasi-scientific repute, writing long before the Martian invasion, didforecast for man a final structure not unlike the actual Martiancondition. His prophecy, I remember, appeared in November or December,1893, in a long-defunct publication, the _Pall Mall Budget_, and Irecall a caricature of it in a pre-Martian periodical called _Punch_.He pointed out—writing in a foolish, facetious tone—that the perfectionof mechanical appliances must ultimately supersede limbs; theperfection of chemical devices, digestion; that such organs as hair,external nose, teeth, ears, and chin were no longer essential parts ofthe human being, and that the tendency of natural selection would liein the direction of their steady diminution through the coming ages.The brain alone remained a cardinal necessity. Only one other part ofthe body had a strong case for survival, and that was the hand,“teacher and agent of the brain.” While the rest of the body dwindled,the hands would grow larger.There is many a true word written in jest, and here in the Martians wehave beyond dispute the actual accomplishment of such a suppression ofthe animal side of the organism by the intelligence. To me it is quitecredible that the Martians may be descended from beings not unlikeourselves, by a gradual development of brain and hands (the lattergiving rise to the two bunches of delicate tentacles at last) at theexpense of the rest of the body. Without the body the brain would, ofcourse, become a mere selfish intelligence, without any of theemotional substratum of the human being.The last salient point in which the systems of these creatures differedfrom ours was in what one might have thought a very trivial particular.Micro-organisms, which cause so much disease and pain on earth, haveeither never appeared upon Mars or Martian sanitary science eliminatedthem ages ago. A hundred diseases, all the fevers and contagions ofhuman life, consumption, cancers, tumours and such morbidities, neverenter the scheme of their life. And speaking of the differences betweenthe life on Mars and terrestrial life, I may allude here to the curioussuggestions of the red weed.Apparently the vegetable kingdom in Mars, instead of having green for adominant colour, is of a vivid blood-red tint. At any rate, the seedswhich the Martians (intentionally or accidentally) brought with themgave rise in all cases to red-coloured growths. Only that knownpopularly as the red weed, however, gained any footing in competitionwith terrestrial forms. The red creeper was quite a transitory growth,and few people have seen it growing. For a time, however, the red weedgrew with astonishing vigour and luxuriance. It spread up the sides ofthe pit by the third or fourth day of our imprisonment, and itscactus-like branches formed a carmine fringe to the edges of ourtriangular window. And afterwards I found it broadcast throughout thecountry, and especially wherever there was a stream of water.The Martians had what appears to have been an auditory organ, a singleround drum at the back of the head-body, and eyes with a visual rangenot very different from ours except that, according to Philips, blueand violet were as black to them. It is commonly supposed that theycommunicated by sounds and tentacular gesticulations; this is asserted,for instance, in the able but hastily compiled pamphlet (writtenevidently by someone not an eye-witness of Martian actions) to which Ihave already alluded, and which, so far, has been the chief source ofinformation concerning them. Now no surviving human being saw so muchof the Martians in action as I did. I take no credit to myself for anaccident, but the fact is so. And I assert that I watched them closelytime after time, and that I have seen four, five, and (once) six ofthem sluggishly performing the most elaborately complicated operationstogether without either sound or gesture. Their peculiar hootinginvariably preceded feeding; it had no modulation, and was, I believe,in no sense a signal, but merely the expiration of air preparatory tothe suctional operation. I have a certain claim to at least anelementary knowledge of psychology, and in this matter I amconvinced—as firmly as I am convinced of anything—that the Martiansinterchanged thoughts without any physical intermediation. And I havebeen convinced of this in spite of strong preconceptions. Before theMartian invasion, as an occasional reader here or there may remember, Ihad written with some little vehemence against the telepathic theory.The Martians wore no clothing. Their conceptions of ornament anddecorum were necessarily different from ours; and not only were theyevidently much less sensible of changes of temperature than we are, butchanges of pressure do not seem to have affected their health at allseriously. Yet though they wore no clothing, it was in the otherartificial additions to their bodily resources that their greatsuperiority over man lay. We men, with our bicycles and road-skates,our Lilienthal soaring-machines, our guns and sticks and so forth, arejust in the beginning of the evolution that the Martians have workedout. They have become practically mere brains, wearing different bodiesaccording to their needs just as men wear suits of clothes and take abicycle in a hurry or an umbrella in the wet. And of their appliances,perhaps nothing is more wonderful to a man than the curious fact thatwhat is the dominant feature of almost all human devices in mechanismis absent—the _wheel_ is absent; among all the things they brought toearth there is no trace or suggestion of their use of wheels. One wouldhave at least expected it in locomotion. And in this connection it iscurious to remark that even on this earth Nature has never hit upon thewheel, or has preferred other expedients to its development. And notonly did the Martians either not know of (which is incredible), orabstain from, the wheel, but in their apparatus singularly little useis made of the fixed pivot or relatively fixed pivot, with circularmotions thereabout confined to one plane. Almost all the joints of themachinery present a complicated system of sliding parts moving oversmall but beautifully curved friction bearings. And while upon thismatter of detail, it is remarkable that the long leverages of theirmachines are in most cases actuated by a sort of sham musculature ofthe disks in an elastic sheath; these disks become polarised and drawnclosely and powerfully together when traversed by a current ofelectricity. In this way the curious parallelism to animal motions,which was so striking and disturbing to the human beholder, wasattained. Such quasi-muscles abounded in the crablike handling-machinewhich, on my first peeping out of the slit, I watched unpacking thecylinder. It seemed infinitely more alive than the actual Martianslying beyond it in the sunset light, panting, stirring ineffectualtentacles, and moving feebly after their vast journey across space.While I was still watching their sluggish motions in the sunlight, andnoting each strange detail of their form, the curate reminded me of hispresence by pulling violently at my arm. I turned to a scowling face,and silent, eloquent lips. He wanted the slit, which permitted only oneof us to peep through; and so I had to forego watching them for a timewhile he enjoyed that privilege.When I looked again, the busy handling-machine had already put togetherseveral of the pieces of apparatus it had taken out of the cylinderinto a shape having an unmistakable likeness to its own; and down onthe left a busy little digging mechanism had come into view, emittingjets of green vapour and working its way round the pit, excavating andembanking in a methodical and discriminating manner. This it was whichhad caused the regular beating noise, and the rhythmic shocks that hadkept our ruinous refuge quivering. It piped and whistled as it worked.So far as I could see, the thing was without a directing Martian atall.III.THE DAYS OF IMPRISONMENT.The arrival of a second fighting-machine drove us from our peepholeinto the scullery, for we feared that from his elevation the Martianmight see down upon us behind our barrier. At a later date we began tofeel less in danger of their eyes, for to an eye in the dazzle of thesunlight outside our refuge must have been blank blackness, but atfirst the slightest suggestion of approach drove us into the sculleryin heart-throbbing retreat. Yet terrible as was the danger we incurred,the attraction of peeping was for both of us irresistible. And I recallnow with a sort of wonder that, in spite of the infinite danger inwhich we were between starvation and a still more terrible death, wecould yet struggle bitterly for that horrible privilege of sight. Wewould race across the kitchen in a grotesque way between eagerness andthe dread of making a noise, and strike each other, and thrust andkick, within a few inches of exposure.The fact is that we had absolutely incompatible dispositions and habitsof thought and action, and our danger and isolation only accentuatedthe incompatibility. At Halliford I had already come to hate thecurate’s trick of helpless exclamation, his stupid rigidity of mind.His endless muttering monologue vitiated every effort I made to thinkout a line of action, and drove me at times, thus pent up andintensified, almost to the verge of craziness. He was as lacking inrestraint as a silly woman. He would weep for hours together, and Iverily believe that to the very end this spoiled child of life thoughthis weak tears in some way efficacious. And I would sit in the darknessunable to keep my mind off him by reason of his importunities. He atemore than I did, and it was in vain I pointed out that our only chanceof life was to stop in the house until the Martians had done with theirpit, that in that long patience a time might presently come when weshould need food. He ate and drank impulsively in heavy meals at longintervals. He slept little.As the days wore on, his utter carelessness of any consideration sointensified our distress and danger that I had, much as I loathed doingit, to resort to threats, and at last to blows. That brought him toreason for a time. But he was one of those weak creatures, void ofpride, timorous, anæmic, hateful souls, full of shifty cunning, whoface neither God nor man, who face not even themselves.It is disagreeable for me to recall and write these things, but I setthem down that my story may lack nothing. Those who have escaped thedark and terrible aspects of life will find my brutality, my flash ofrage in our final tragedy, easy enough to blame; for they know what iswrong as well as any, but not what is possible to tortured men. Butthose who have been under the shadow, who have gone down at last toelemental things, will have a wider charity.And while within we fought out our dark, dim contest of whispers,snatched food and drink, and gripping hands and blows, without, in thepitiless sunlight of that terrible June, was the strange wonder, theunfamiliar routine of the Martians in the pit. Let me return to thosefirst new experiences of mine. After a long time I ventured back to thepeephole, to find that the new-comers had been reinforced by theoccupants of no fewer than three of the fighting-machines. These lasthad brought with them certain fresh appliances that stood in an orderlymanner about the cylinder. The second handling-machine was nowcompleted, and was busied in serving one of the novel contrivances thebig machine had brought. This was a body resembling a milk can in itsgeneral form, above which oscillated a pear-shaped receptacle, and fromwhich a stream of white powder flowed into a circular basin below.The oscillatory motion was imparted to this by one tentacle of thehandling-machine. With two spatulate hands the handling-machine wasdigging out and flinging masses of clay into the pear-shaped receptacleabove, while with another arm it periodically opened a door and removedrusty and blackened clinkers from the middle part of the machine.Another steely tentacle directed the powder from the basin along aribbed channel towards some receiver that was hidden from me by themound of bluish dust. From this unseen receiver a little thread ofgreen smoke rose vertically into the quiet air. As I looked, thehandling-machine, with a faint and musical clinking, extended,telescopic fashion, a tentacle that had been a moment before a mereblunt projection, until its end was hidden behind the mound of clay. Inanother second it had lifted a bar of white aluminium into sight,untarnished as yet, and shining dazzlingly, and deposited it in agrowing stack of bars that stood at the side of the pit. Between sunsetand starlight this dexterous machine must have made more than a hundredsuch bars out of the crude clay, and the mound of bluish dust rosesteadily until it topped the side of the pit.The contrast between the swift and complex movements of thesecontrivances and the inert panting clumsiness of their masters wasacute, and for days I had to tell myself repeatedly that these latterwere indeed the living of the two things.The curate had possession of the slit when the first men were broughtto the pit. I was sitting below, huddled up, listening with all myears. He made a sudden movement backward, and I, fearful that we wereobserved, crouched in a spasm of terror. He came sliding down therubbish and crept beside me in the darkness, inarticulate,gesticulating, and for a moment I shared his panic. His gesturesuggested a resignation of the slit, and after a little while mycuriosity gave me courage, and I rose up, stepped across him, andclambered up to it. At first I could see no reason for his franticbehaviour. The twilight had now come, the stars were little and faint,but the pit was illuminated by the flickering green fire that came fromthe aluminium-making. The whole picture was a flickering scheme ofgreen gleams and shifting rusty black shadows, strangely trying to theeyes. Over and through it all went the bats, heeding it not at all. Thesprawling Martians were no longer to be seen, the mound of blue-greenpowder had risen to cover them from sight, and a fighting-machine, withits legs contracted, crumpled, and abbreviated, stood across the cornerof the pit. And then, amid the clangour of the machinery, came adrifting suspicion of human voices, that I entertained at first only todismiss.I crouched, watching this fighting-machine closely, satisfying myselfnow for the first time that the hood did indeed contain a Martian. Asthe green flames lifted I could see the oily gleam of his integumentand the brightness of his eyes. And suddenly I heard a yell, and saw along tentacle reaching over the shoulder of the machine to the littlecage that hunched upon its back. Then something—something strugglingviolently—was lifted high against the sky, a black, vague enigmaagainst the starlight; and as this black object came down again, I sawby the green brightness that it was a man. For an instant he wasclearly visible. He was a stout, ruddy, middle-aged man, well dressed;three days before, he must have been walking the world, a man ofconsiderable consequence. I could see his staring eyes and gleams oflight on his studs and watch chain. He vanished behind the mound, andfor a moment there was silence. And then began a shrieking and asustained and cheerful hooting from the Martians.I slid down the rubbish, struggled to my feet, clapped my hands over myears, and bolted into the scullery. The curate, who had been crouchingsilently with his arms over his head, looked up as I passed, cried outquite loudly at my desertion of him, and came running after me.That night, as we lurked in the scullery, balanced between our horrorand the terrible fascination this peeping had, although I felt anurgent need of action I tried in vain to conceive some plan of escape;but afterwards, during the second day, I was able to consider ourposition with great clearness. The curate, I found, was quite incapableof discussion; this new and culminating atrocity had robbed him of allvestiges of reason or forethought. Practically he had already sunk tothe level of an animal. But as the saying goes, I gripped myself withboth hands. It grew upon my mind, once I could face the facts, thatterrible as our position was, there was as yet no justification forabsolute despair. Our chief chance lay in the possibility of theMartians making the pit nothing more than a temporary encampment. Oreven if they kept it permanently, they might not consider it necessaryto guard it, and a chance of escape might be afforded us. I alsoweighed very carefully the possibility of our digging a way out in adirection away from the pit, but the chances of our emerging withinsight of some sentinel fighting-machine seemed at first too great. AndI should have had to do all the digging myself. The curate wouldcertainly have failed me.It was on the third day, if my memory serves me right, that I saw thelad killed. It was the only occasion on which I actually saw theMartians feed. After that experience I avoided the hole in the wall forthe better part of a day. I went into the scullery, removed the door,and spent some hours digging with my hatchet as silently as possible;but when I had made a hole about a couple of feet deep the loose earthcollapsed noisily, and I did not dare continue. I lost heart, and laydown on the scullery floor for a long time, having no spirit even tomove. And after that I abandoned altogether the idea of escaping byexcavation.It says much for the impression the Martians had made upon me that atfirst I entertained little or no hope of our escape being brought aboutby their overthrow through any human effort. But on the fourth or fifthnight I heard a sound like heavy guns.It was very late in the night, and the moon was shining brightly. TheMartians had taken away the excavating-machine, and, save for afighting-machine that stood in the remoter bank of the pit and ahandling-machine that was buried out of my sight in a corner of the pitimmediately beneath my peephole, the place was deserted by them. Exceptfor the pale glow from the handling-machine and the bars and patches ofwhite moonlight the pit was in darkness, and, except for the clinkingof the handling-machine, quite still. That night was a beautifulserenity; save for one planet, the moon seemed to have the sky toherself. I heard a dog howling, and that familiar sound it was thatmade me listen. Then I heard quite distinctly a booming exactly likethe sound of great guns. Six distinct reports I counted, and after along interval six again. And that was all.VI.THE DEATH OF THE CURATE.It was on the sixth day of our imprisonment that I peeped for the lasttime, and presently found myself alone. Instead of keeping close to meand trying to oust me from the slit, the curate had gone back into thescullery. I was struck by a sudden thought. I went back quickly andquietly into the scullery. In the darkness I heard the curate drinking.I snatched in the darkness, and my fingers caught a bottle of burgundy.For a few minutes there was a tussle. The bottle struck the floor andbroke, and I desisted and rose. We stood panting and threatening eachother. In the end I planted myself between him and the food, and toldhim of my determination to begin a discipline. I divided the food inthe pantry, into rations to last us ten days. I would not let him eatany more that day. In the afternoon he made a feeble effort to get atthe food. I had been dozing, but in an instant I was awake. All day andall night we sat face to face, I weary but resolute, and he weeping andcomplaining of his immediate hunger. It was, I know, a night and a day,but to me it seemed—it seems now—an interminable length of time.And so our widened incompatibility ended at last in open conflict. Fortwo vast days we struggled in undertones and wrestling contests. Therewere times when I beat and kicked him madly, times when I cajoled andpersuaded him, and once I tried to bribe him with the last bottle ofburgundy, for there was a rain-water pump from which I could get water.But neither force nor kindness availed; he was indeed beyond reason. Hewould neither desist from his attacks on the food nor from his noisybabbling to himself. The rudimentary precautions to keep ourimprisonment endurable he would not observe. Slowly I began to realisethe complete overthrow of his intelligence, to perceive that my solecompanion in this close and sickly darkness was a man insane.From certain vague memories I am inclined to think my own mind wanderedat times. I had strange and hideous dreams whenever I slept. It soundsparadoxical, but I am inclined to think that the weakness and insanityof the curate warned me, braced me, and kept me a sane man.On the eighth day he began to talk aloud instead of whispering, andnothing I could do would moderate his speech.“It is just, O God!” he would say, over and over again. “It is just. Onme and mine be the punishment laid. We have sinned, we have fallenshort. There was poverty, sorrow; the poor were trodden in the dust,and I held my peace. I preached acceptable folly—my God, whatfolly!—when I should have stood up, though I died for it, and calledupon them to repent—repent! . . . Oppressors of the poor and needy . .. ! The wine press of God!”Then he would suddenly revert to the matter of the food I withheld fromhim, praying, begging, weeping, at last threatening. He began to raisehis voice—I prayed him not to. He perceived a hold on me—he threatenedhe would shout and bring the Martians upon us. For a time that scaredme; but any concession would have shortened our chance of escape beyondestimating. I defied him, although I felt no assurance that he mightnot do this thing. But that day, at any rate, he did not. He talkedwith his voice rising slowly, through the greater part of the eighthand ninth days—threats, entreaties, mingled with a torrent of half-saneand always frothy repentance for his vacant sham of God’s service, suchas made me pity him. Then he slept awhile, and began again with renewedstrength, so loudly that I must needs make him desist.“Be still!” I implored.He rose to his knees, for he had been sitting in the darkness near thecopper.“I have been still too long,” he said, in a tone that must have reachedthe pit, “and now I must bear my witness. Woe unto this unfaithfulcity! Woe! Woe! Woe! Woe! Woe! To the inhabitants of the earth byreason of the other voices of the trumpet——”“Shut up!” I said, rising to my feet, and in a terror lest the Martiansshould hear us. “For God’s sake——”“Nay,” shouted the curate, at the top of his voice, standing likewiseand extending his arms. “Speak! The word of the Lord is upon me!”In three strides he was at the door leading into the kitchen.“I must bear my witness! I go! It has already been too long delayed.”I put out my hand and felt the meat chopper hanging to the wall. In aflash I was after him. I was fierce with fear. Before he was halfwayacross the kitchen I had overtaken him. With one last touch of humanityI turned the blade back and struck him with the butt. He went headlongforward and lay stretched on the ground. I stumbled over him and stoodpanting. He lay still.Suddenly I heard a noise without, the run and smash of slippingplaster, and the triangular aperture in the wall was darkened. I lookedup and saw the lower surface of a handling-machine coming slowly acrossthe hole. One of its gripping limbs curled amid the debris; anotherlimb appeared, feeling its way over the fallen beams. I stoodpetrified, staring. Then I saw through a sort of glass plate near theedge of the body the face, as we may call it, and the large dark eyesof a Martian, peering, and then a long metallic snake of tentacle camefeeling slowly through the hole.I turned by an effort, stumbled over the curate, and stopped at thescullery door. The tentacle was now some way, two yards or more, in theroom, and twisting and turning, with queer sudden movements, this wayand that. For a while I stood fascinated by that slow, fitful advance.Then, with a faint, hoarse cry, I forced myself across the scullery. Itrembled violently; I could scarcely stand upright. I opened the doorof the coal cellar, and stood there in the darkness staring at thefaintly lit doorway into the kitchen, and listening. Had the Martianseen me? What was it doing now?Something was moving to and fro there, very quietly; every now and thenit tapped against the wall, or started on its movements with a faintmetallic ringing, like the movements of keys on a split-ring. Then aheavy body—I knew too well what—was dragged across the floor of thekitchen towards the opening. Irresistibly attracted, I crept to thedoor and peeped into the kitchen. In the triangle of bright outersunlight I saw the Martian, in its Briareus of a handling-machine,scrutinizing the curate’s head. I thought at once that it would infermy presence from the mark of the blow I had given him.I crept back to the coal cellar, shut the door, and began to covermyself up as much as I could, and as noiselessly as possible in thedarkness, among the firewood and coal therein. Every now and then Ipaused, rigid, to hear if the Martian had thrust its tentacles throughthe opening again.Then the faint metallic jingle returned. I traced it slowly feelingover the kitchen. Presently I heard it nearer—in the scullery, as Ijudged. I thought that its length might be insufficient to reach me. Iprayed copiously. It passed, scraping faintly across the cellar door.An age of almost intolerable suspense intervened; then I heard itfumbling at the latch! It had found the door! The Martians understooddoors!It worried at the catch for a minute, perhaps, and then the dooropened.In the darkness I could just see the thing—like an elephant’s trunkmore than anything else—waving towards me and touching and examiningthe wall, coals, wood and ceiling. It was like a black worm swaying itsblind head to and fro.Once, even, it touched the heel of my boot. I was on the verge ofscreaming; I bit my hand. For a time the tentacle was silent. I couldhave fancied it had been withdrawn. Presently, with an abrupt click, itgripped something—I thought it had me!—and seemed to go out of thecellar again. For a minute I was not sure. Apparently it had taken alump of coal to examine.I seized the opportunity of slightly shifting my position, which hadbecome cramped, and then listened. I whispered passionate prayers forsafety.Then I heard the slow, deliberate sound creeping towards me again.Slowly, slowly it drew near, scratching against the walls and tappingthe furniture.While I was still doubtful, it rapped smartly against the cellar doorand closed it. I heard it go into the pantry, and the biscuit-tinsrattled and a bottle smashed, and then came a heavy bump against thecellar door. Then silence that passed into an infinity of suspense.Had it gone?At last I decided that it had.It came into the scullery no more; but I lay all the tenth day in theclose darkness, buried among coals and firewood, not daring even tocrawl out for the drink for which I craved. It was the eleventh daybefore I ventured so far from my security.V.THE STILLNESS.My first act before I went into the pantry was to fasten the doorbetween the kitchen and the scullery. But the pantry was empty; everyscrap of food had gone. Apparently, the Martian had taken it all on theprevious day. At that discovery I despaired for the first time. I tookno food, or no drink either, on the eleventh or the twelfth day.At first my mouth and throat were parched, and my strength ebbedsensibly. I sat about in the darkness of the scullery, in a state ofdespondent wretchedness. My mind ran on eating. I thought I had becomedeaf, for the noises of movement I had been accustomed to hear from thepit had ceased absolutely. I did not feel strong enough to crawlnoiselessly to the peephole, or I would have gone there.On the twelfth day my throat was so painful that, taking the chance ofalarming the Martians, I attacked the creaking rain-water pump thatstood by the sink, and got a couple of glassfuls of blackened andtainted rain water. I was greatly refreshed by this, and emboldened bythe fact that no enquiring tentacle followed the noise of my pumping.During these days, in a rambling, inconclusive way, I thought much ofthe curate and of the manner of his death.On the thirteenth day I drank some more water, and dozed and thoughtdisjointedly of eating and of vague impossible plans of escape.Whenever I dozed I dreamt of horrible phantasms, of the death of thecurate, or of sumptuous dinners; but, asleep or awake, I felt a keenpain that urged me to drink again and again. The light that came intothe scullery was no longer grey, but red. To my disordered imaginationit seemed the colour of blood.On the fourteenth day I went into the kitchen, and I was surprised tofind that the fronds of the red weed had grown right across the hole inthe wall, turning the half-light of the place into a crimson-colouredobscurity.It was early on the fifteenth day that I heard a curious, familiarsequence of sounds in the kitchen, and, listening, identified it as thesnuffing and scratching of a dog. Going into the kitchen, I saw a dog’snose peering in through a break among the ruddy fronds. This greatlysurprised me. At the scent of me he barked shortly.I thought if I could induce him to come into the place quietly I shouldbe able, perhaps, to kill and eat him; and in any case, it would beadvisable to kill him, lest his actions attracted the attention of theMartians.I crept forward, saying “Good dog!” very softly; but he suddenlywithdrew his head and disappeared.I listened—I was not deaf—but certainly the pit was still. I heard asound like the flutter of a bird’s wings, and a hoarse croaking, butthat was all.For a long while I lay close to the peephole, but not daring to moveaside the red plants that obscured it. Once or twice I heard a faintpitter-patter like the feet of the dog going hither and thither on thesand far below me, and there were more birdlike sounds, but that wasall. At length, encouraged by the silence, I looked out.Except in the corner, where a multitude of crows hopped and fought overthe skeletons of the dead the Martians had consumed, there was not aliving thing in the pit.I stared about me, scarcely believing my eyes. All the machinery hadgone. Save for the big mound of greyish-blue powder in one corner,certain bars of aluminium in another, the black birds, and theskeletons of the killed, the place was merely an empty circular pit inthe sand.Slowly I thrust myself out through the red weed, and stood upon themound of rubble. I could see in any direction save behind me, to thenorth, and neither Martians nor sign of Martians were to be seen. Thepit dropped sheerly from my feet, but a little way along the rubbishafforded a practicable slope to the summit of the ruins. My chance ofescape had come. I began to tremble.I hesitated for some time, and then, in a gust of desperate resolution,and with a heart that throbbed violently, I scrambled to the top of themound in which I had been buried so long.I looked about again. To the northward, too, no Martian was visible.When I had last seen this part of Sheen in the daylight it had been astraggling street of comfortable white and red houses, interspersedwith abundant shady trees. Now I stood on a mound of smashed brickwork,clay, and gravel, over which spread a multitude of red cactus-shapedplants, knee-high, without a solitary terrestrial growth to disputetheir footing. The trees near me were dead and brown, but further anetwork of red thread scaled the still living stems.The neighbouring houses had all been wrecked, but none had been burned;their walls stood, sometimes to the second story, with smashed windowsand shattered doors. The red weed grew tumultuously in their rooflessrooms. Below me was the great pit, with the crows struggling for itsrefuse. A number of other birds hopped about among the ruins. Far awayI saw a gaunt cat slink crouchingly along a wall, but traces of menthere were none.The day seemed, by contrast with my recent confinement, dazzlinglybright, the sky a glowing blue. A gentle breeze kept the red weed thatcovered every scrap of unoccupied ground gently swaying. And oh! thesweetness of the air!VI.THE WORK OF FIFTEEN DAYS.For some time I stood tottering on the mound regardless of my safety.Within that noisome den from which I had emerged I had thought with anarrow intensity only of our immediate security. I had not realisedwhat had been happening to the world, had not anticipated thisstartling vision of unfamiliar things. I had expected to see Sheen inruins—I found about me the landscape, weird and lurid, of anotherplanet.For that moment I touched an emotion beyond the common range of men,yet one that the poor brutes we dominate know only too well. I felt asa rabbit might feel returning to his burrow and suddenly confronted bythe work of a dozen busy navvies digging the foundations of a house. Ifelt the first inkling of a thing that presently grew quite clear in mymind, that oppressed me for many days, a sense of dethronement, apersuasion that I was no longer a master, but an animal among theanimals, under the Martian heel. With us it would be as with them, tolurk and watch, to run and hide; the fear and empire of man had passedaway.But so soon as this strangeness had been realised it passed, and mydominant motive became the hunger of my long and dismal fast. In thedirection away from the pit I saw, beyond a red-covered wall, a patchof garden ground unburied. This gave me a hint, and I went knee-deep,and sometimes neck-deep, in the red weed. The density of the weed gaveme a reassuring sense of hiding. The wall was some six feet high, andwhen I attempted to clamber it I found I could not lift my feet to thecrest. So I went along by the side of it, and came to a corner and arockwork that enabled me to get to the top, and tumble into the gardenI coveted. Here I found some young onions, a couple of gladiolus bulbs,and a quantity of immature carrots, all of which I secured, and,scrambling over a ruined wall, went on my way through scarlet andcrimson trees towards Kew—it was like walking through an avenue ofgigantic blood drops—possessed with two ideas: to get more food, and tolimp, as soon and as far as my strength permitted, out of this accursedunearthly region of the pit.Some way farther, in a grassy place, was a group of mushrooms whichalso I devoured, and then I came upon a brown sheet of flowing shallowwater, where meadows used to be. These fragments of nourishment servedonly to whet my hunger. At first I was surprised at this flood in ahot, dry summer, but afterwards I discovered that it was caused by thetropical exuberance of the red weed. Directly this extraordinary growthencountered water it straightway became gigantic and of unparalleledfecundity. Its seeds were simply poured down into the water of the Weyand Thames, and its swiftly growing and Titanic water fronds speedilychoked both those rivers.At Putney, as I afterwards saw, the bridge was almost lost in a tangleof this weed, and at Richmond, too, the Thames water poured in a broadand shallow stream across the meadows of Hampton and Twickenham. As thewater spread the weed followed them, until the ruined villas of theThames valley were for a time lost in this red swamp, whose margin Iexplored, and much of the desolation the Martians had caused wasconcealed.In the end the red weed succumbed almost as quickly as it had spread. Acankering disease, due, it is believed, to the action of certainbacteria, presently seized upon it. Now by the action of naturalselection, all terrestrial plants have acquired a resisting poweragainst bacterial diseases—they never succumb without a severestruggle, but the red weed rotted like a thing already dead. The frondsbecame bleached, and then shrivelled and brittle. They broke off at theleast touch, and the waters that had stimulated their early growthcarried their last vestiges out to sea.My first act on coming to this water was, of course, to slake mythirst. I drank a great deal of it and, moved by an impulse, gnawedsome fronds of red weed; but they were watery, and had a sickly,metallic taste. I found the water was sufficiently shallow for me towade securely, although the red weed impeded my feet a little; but theflood evidently got deeper towards the river, and I turned back toMortlake. I managed to make out the road by means of occasional ruinsof its villas and fences and lamps, and so presently I got out of thisspate and made my way to the hill going up towards Roehampton and cameout on Putney Common.Here the scenery changed from the strange and unfamiliar to thewreckage of the familiar: patches of ground exhibited the devastationof a cyclone, and in a few score yards I would come upon perfectlyundisturbed spaces, houses with their blinds trimly drawn and doorsclosed, as if they had been left for a day by the owners, or as iftheir inhabitants slept within. The red weed was less abundant; thetall trees along the lane were free from the red creeper. I hunted forfood among the trees, finding nothing, and I also raided a couple ofsilent houses, but they had already been broken into and ransacked. Irested for the remainder of the daylight in a shrubbery, being, in myenfeebled condition, too fatigued to push on.All this time I saw no human beings, and no signs of the Martians. Iencountered a couple of hungry-looking dogs, but both hurriedcircuitously away from the advances I made them. Near Roehampton I hadseen two human skeletons—not bodies, but skeletons, picked clean—and inthe wood by me I found the crushed and scattered bones of several catsand rabbits and the skull of a sheep. But though I gnawed parts ofthese in my mouth, there was nothing to be got from them.After sunset I struggled on along the road towards Putney, where Ithink the Heat-Ray must have been used for some reason. And in thegarden beyond Roehampton I got a quantity of immature potatoes,sufficient to stay my hunger. From this garden one looked down uponPutney and the river. The aspect of the place in the dusk wassingularly desolate: blackened trees, blackened, desolate ruins, anddown the hill the sheets of the flooded river, red-tinged with theweed. And over all—silence. It filled me with indescribable terror tothink how swiftly that desolating change had come.For a time I believed that mankind had been swept out of existence, andthat I stood there alone, the last man left alive. Hard by the top ofPutney Hill I came upon another skeleton, with the arms dislocated andremoved several yards from the rest of the body. As I proceeded Ibecame more and more convinced that the extermination of mankind was,save for such stragglers as myself, already accomplished in this partof the world. The Martians, I thought, had gone on and left the countrydesolated, seeking food elsewhere. Perhaps even now they weredestroying Berlin or Paris, or it might be they had gone northward.VII.THE MAN ON PUTNEY HILL.I spent that night in the inn that stands at the top of Putney Hill,sleeping in a made bed for the first time since my flight toLeatherhead. I will not tell the needless trouble I had breaking intothat house—afterwards I found the front door was on the latch—nor how Iransacked every room for food, until just on the verge of despair, inwhat seemed to me to be a servant’s bedroom, I found a rat-gnawed crustand two tins of pineapple. The place had been already searched andemptied. In the bar I afterwards found some biscuits and sandwichesthat had been overlooked. The latter I could not eat, they were toorotten, but the former not only stayed my hunger, but filled mypockets. I lit no lamps, fearing some Martian might come beating thatpart of London for food in the night. Before I went to bed I had aninterval of restlessness, and prowled from window to window, peeringout for some sign of these monsters. I slept little. As I lay in bed Ifound myself thinking consecutively—a thing I do not remember to havedone since my last argument with the curate. During all the interveningtime my mental condition had been a hurrying succession of vagueemotional states or a sort of stupid receptivity. But in the night mybrain, reinforced, I suppose, by the food I had eaten, grew clearagain, and I thought.Three things struggled for possession of my mind: the killing of thecurate, the whereabouts of the Martians, and the possible fate of mywife. The former gave me no sensation of horror or remorse to recall; Isaw it simply as a thing done, a memory infinitely disagreeable butquite without the quality of remorse. I saw myself then as I see myselfnow, driven step by step towards that hasty blow, the creature of asequence of accidents leading inevitably to that. I felt nocondemnation; yet the memory, static, unprogressive, haunted me. In thesilence of the night, with that sense of the nearness of God thatsometimes comes into the stillness and the darkness, I stood my trial,my only trial, for that moment of wrath and fear. I retraced every stepof our conversation from the moment when I had found him crouchingbeside me, heedless of my thirst, and pointing to the fire and smokethat streamed up from the ruins of Weybridge. We had been incapable ofco-operation—grim chance had taken no heed of that. Had I foreseen, Ishould have left him at Halliford. But I did not foresee; and crime isto foresee and do. And I set this down as I have set all this storydown, as it was. There were no witnesses—all these things I might haveconcealed. But I set it down, and the reader must form his judgment ashe will.And when, by an effort, I had set aside that picture of a prostratebody, I faced the problem of the Martians and the fate of my wife. Forthe former I had no data; I could imagine a hundred things, and so,unhappily, I could for the latter. And suddenly that night becameterrible. I found myself sitting up in bed, staring at the dark. Ifound myself praying that the Heat-Ray might have suddenly andpainlessly struck her out of being. Since the night of my return fromLeatherhead I had not prayed. I had uttered prayers, fetish prayers,had prayed as heathens mutter charms when I was in extremity; but now Iprayed indeed, pleading steadfastly and sanely, face to face with thedarkness of God. Strange night! Strangest in this, that so soon as dawnhad come, I, who had talked with God, crept out of the house like a ratleaving its hiding place—a creature scarcely larger, an inferioranimal, a thing that for any passing whim of our masters might behunted and killed. Perhaps they also prayed confidently to God. Surely,if we have learned nothing else, this war has taught us pity—pity forthose witless souls that suffer our dominion.The morning was bright and fine, and the eastern sky glowed pink, andwas fretted with little golden clouds. In the road that runs from thetop of Putney Hill to Wimbledon was a number of poor vestiges of thepanic torrent that must have poured Londonward on the Sunday nightafter the fighting began. There was a little two-wheeled cart inscribedwith the name of Thomas Lobb, Greengrocer, New Malden, with a smashedwheel and an abandoned tin trunk; there was a straw hat trampled intothe now hardened mud, and at the top of West Hill a lot ofblood-stained glass about the overturned water trough. My movementswere languid, my plans of the vaguest. I had an idea of going toLeatherhead, though I knew that there I had the poorest chance offinding my wife. Certainly, unless death had overtaken them suddenly,my cousins and she would have fled thence; but it seemed to me I mightfind or learn there whither the Surrey people had fled. I knew I wantedto find my wife, that my heart ached for her and the world of men, butI had no clear idea how the finding might be done. I was also sharplyaware now of my intense loneliness. From the corner I went, under coverof a thicket of trees and bushes, to the edge of Wimbledon Common,stretching wide and far.That dark expanse was lit in patches by yellow gorse and broom; therewas no red weed to be seen, and as I prowled, hesitating, on the vergeof the open, the sun rose, flooding it all with light and vitality. Icame upon a busy swarm of little frogs in a swampy place among thetrees. I stopped to look at them, drawing a lesson from their stoutresolve to live. And presently, turning suddenly, with an odd feelingof being watched, I beheld something crouching amid a clump of bushes.I stood regarding this. I made a step towards it, and it rose up andbecame a man armed with a cutlass. I approached him slowly. He stoodsilent and motionless, regarding me.As I drew nearer I perceived he was dressed in clothes as dusty andfilthy as my own; he looked, indeed, as though he had been draggedthrough a culvert. Nearer, I distinguished the green slime of ditchesmixing with the pale drab of dried clay and shiny, coaly patches. Hisblack hair fell over his eyes, and his face was dark and dirty andsunken, so that at first I did not recognise him. There was a red cutacross the lower part of his face.“Stop!” he cried, when I was within ten yards of him, and I stopped.His voice was hoarse. “Where do you come from?” he said.I thought, surveying him.“I come from Mortlake,” I said. “I was buried near the pit the Martiansmade about their cylinder. I have worked my way out and escaped.”“There is no food about here,” he said. “This is my country. All thishill down to the river, and back to Clapham, and up to the edge of thecommon. There is only food for one. Which way are you going?”I answered slowly.“I don’t know,” I said. “I have been buried in the ruins of a housethirteen or fourteen days. I don’t know what has happened.”He looked at me doubtfully, then started, and looked with a changedexpression.“I’ve no wish to stop about here,” said I. “I think I shall go toLeatherhead, for my wife was there.”He shot out a pointing finger.“It is you,” said he; “the man from Woking. And you weren’t killed atWeybridge?”I recognised him at the same moment.“You are the artilleryman who came into my garden.”“Good luck!” he said. “We are lucky ones! Fancy _you_!” He put out ahand, and I took it. “I crawled up a drain,” he said. “But they didn’tkill everyone. And after they went away I got off towards Walton acrossthe fields. But—— It’s not sixteen days altogether—and your hair isgrey.” He looked over his shoulder suddenly. “Only a rook,” he said.“One gets to know that birds have shadows these days. This is a bitopen. Let us crawl under those bushes and talk.”“Have you seen any Martians?” I said. “Since I crawled out——”“They’ve gone away across London,” he said. “I guess they’ve got abigger camp there. Of a night, all over there, Hampstead way, the skyis alive with their lights. It’s like a great city, and in the glareyou can just see them moving. By daylight you can’t. But nearer—Ihaven’t seen them—” (he counted on his fingers) “five days. Then I sawa couple across Hammersmith way carrying something big. And the nightbefore last”—he stopped and spoke impressively—“it was just a matter oflights, but it was something up in the air. I believe they’ve built aflying-machine, and are learning to fly.”I stopped, on hands and knees, for we had come to the bushes.“Fly!”“Yes,” he said, “fly.”I went on into a little bower, and sat down.“It is all over with humanity,” I said. “If they can do that they willsimply go round the world.”He nodded.“They will. But—— It will relieve things over here a bit. Andbesides——” He looked at me. “Aren’t you satisfied it _is_ up withhumanity? I am. We’re down; we’re beat.”I stared. Strange as it may seem, I had not arrived at this fact—a factperfectly obvious so soon as he spoke. I had still held a vague hope;rather, I had kept a lifelong habit of mind. He repeated his words,“We’re beat.” They carried absolute conviction.“It’s all over,” he said. “They’ve lost _one_—just _one_. And they’vemade their footing good and crippled the greatest power in the world.They’ve walked over us. The death of that one at Weybridge was anaccident. And these are only pioneers. They kept on coming. These greenstars—I’ve seen none these five or six days, but I’ve no doubt they’refalling somewhere every night. Nothing’s to be done. We’re under! We’rebeat!”I made him no answer. I sat staring before me, trying in vain to devisesome countervailing thought.“This isn’t a war,” said the artilleryman. “It never was a war, anymore than there’s war between man and ants.”Suddenly I recalled the night in the observatory.“After the tenth shot they fired no more—at least, until the firstcylinder came.”“How do you know?” said the artilleryman. I explained. He thought.“Something wrong with the gun,” he said. “But what if there is? They’llget it right again. And even if there’s a delay, how can it alter theend? It’s just men and ants. There’s the ants builds their cities, livetheir lives, have wars, revolutions, until the men want them out of theway, and then they go out of the way. That’s what we are now—just ants.Only——”“Yes,” I said.“We’re eatable ants.”We sat looking at each other.“And what will they do with us?” I said.“That’s what I’ve been thinking,” he said; “that’s what I’ve beenthinking. After Weybridge I went south—thinking. I saw what was up.Most of the people were hard at it squealing and exciting themselves.But I’m not so fond of squealing. I’ve been in sight of death once ortwice; I’m not an ornamental soldier, and at the best and worst,death—it’s just death. And it’s the man that keeps on thinking comesthrough. I saw everyone tracking away south. Says I, ‘Food won’t lastthis way,’ and I turned right back. I went for the Martians like asparrow goes for man. All round”—he waved a hand to thehorizon—“they’re starving in heaps, bolting, treading on each other. .. .”He saw my face, and halted awkwardly.“No doubt lots who had money have gone away to France,” he said. Heseemed to hesitate whether to apologise, met my eyes, and went on:“There’s food all about here. Canned things in shops; wines, spirits,mineral waters; and the water mains and drains are empty. Well, I wastelling you what I was thinking. ‘Here’s intelligent things,’ I said,‘and it seems they want us for food. First, they’ll smash us up—ships,machines, guns, cities, all the order and organisation. All that willgo. If we were the size of ants we might pull through. But we’re not.It’s all too bulky to stop. That’s the first certainty.’ Eh?”I assented.“It is; I’ve thought it out. Very well, then—next; at present we’recaught as we’re wanted. A Martian has only to go a few miles to get acrowd on the run. And I saw one, one day, out by Wandsworth, pickinghouses to pieces and routing among the wreckage. But they won’t keep ondoing that. So soon as they’ve settled all our guns and ships, andsmashed our railways, and done all the things they are doing overthere, they will begin catching us systematic, picking the best andstoring us in cages and things. That’s what they will start doing in abit. Lord! They haven’t begun on us yet. Don’t you see that?”“Not begun!” I exclaimed.“Not begun. All that’s happened so far is through our not having thesense to keep quiet—worrying them with guns and such foolery. Andlosing our heads, and rushing off in crowds to where there wasn’t anymore safety than where we were. They don’t want to bother us yet.They’re making their things—making all the things they couldn’t bringwith them, getting things ready for the rest of their people. Verylikely that’s why the cylinders have stopped for a bit, for fear ofhitting those who are here. And instead of our rushing about blind, onthe howl, or getting dynamite on the chance of busting them up, we’vegot to fix ourselves up according to the new state of affairs. That’show I figure it out. It isn’t quite according to what a man wants forhis species, but it’s about what the facts point to. And that’s theprinciple I acted upon. Cities, nations, civilisation, progress—it’sall over. That game’s up. We’re beat.”“But if that is so, what is there to live for?”The artilleryman looked at me for a moment.“There won’t be any more blessed concerts for a million years or so;there won’t be any Royal Academy of Arts, and no nice little feeds atrestaurants. If it’s amusement you’re after, I reckon the game is up.If you’ve got any drawing-room manners or a dislike to eating peas witha knife or dropping aitches, you’d better chuck ’em away. They ain’t nofurther use.”“You mean——”“I mean that men like me are going on living—for the sake of the breed.I tell you, I’m grim set on living. And if I’m not mistaken, you’llshow what insides _you’ve_ got, too, before long. We aren’t going to beexterminated. And I don’t mean to be caught either, and tamed andfattened and bred like a thundering ox. Ugh! Fancy those browncreepers!”“You don’t mean to say——”“I do. I’m going on, under their feet. I’ve got it planned; I’vethought it out. We men are beat. We don’t know enough. We’ve got tolearn before we’ve got a chance. And we’ve got to live and keepindependent while we learn. See! That’s what has to be done.”I stared, astonished, and stirred profoundly by the man’s resolution.“Great God!” cried I. “But you are a man indeed!” And suddenly Igripped his hand.“Eh!” he said, with his eyes shining. “I’ve thought it out, eh?”“Go on,” I said.“Well, those who mean to escape their catching must get ready. I’mgetting ready. Mind you, it isn’t all of us that are made for wildbeasts; and that’s what it’s got to be. That’s why I watched you. I hadmy doubts. You’re slender. I didn’t know that it was you, you see, orjust how you’d been buried. All these—the sort of people that lived inthese houses, and all those damn little clerks that used to live down_that_ way—they’d be no good. They haven’t any spirit in them—no prouddreams and no proud lusts; and a man who hasn’t one or the other—Lord!What is he but funk and precautions? They just used to skedaddle off towork—I’ve seen hundreds of ’em, bit of breakfast in hand, running wildand shining to catch their little season-ticket train, for fear they’dget dismissed if they didn’t; working at businesses they were afraid totake the trouble to understand; skedaddling back for fear they wouldn’tbe in time for dinner; keeping indoors after dinner for fear of theback streets, and sleeping with the wives they married, not becausethey wanted them, but because they had a bit of money that would makefor safety in their one little miserable skedaddle through the world.Lives insured and a bit invested for fear of accidents. And onSundays—fear of the hereafter. As if hell was built for rabbits! Well,the Martians will just be a godsend to these. Nice roomy cages,fattening food, careful breeding, no worry. After a week or so chasingabout the fields and lands on empty stomachs, they’ll come and becaught cheerful. They’ll be quite glad after a bit. They’ll wonder whatpeople did before there were Martians to take care of them. And the barloafers, and mashers, and singers—I can imagine them. I can imaginethem,” he said, with a sort of sombre gratification. “There’ll be anyamount of sentiment and religion loose among them. There’s hundreds ofthings I saw with my eyes that I’ve only begun to see clearly theselast few days. There’s lots will take things as they are—fat andstupid; and lots will be worried by a sort of feeling that it’s allwrong, and that they ought to be doing something. Now whenever thingsare so that a lot of people feel they ought to be doing something, theweak, and those who go weak with a lot of complicated thinking, alwaysmake for a sort of do-nothing religion, very pious and superior, andsubmit to persecution and the will of the Lord. Very likely you’ve seenthe same thing. It’s energy in a gale of funk, and turned clean insideout. These cages will be full of psalms and hymns and piety. And thoseof a less simple sort will work in a bit of—what is it?—eroticism.”He paused.“Very likely these Martians will make pets of some of them; train themto do tricks—who knows?—get sentimental over the pet boy who grew upand had to be killed. And some, maybe, they will train to hunt us.”“No,” I cried, “that’s impossible! No human being——”“What’s the good of going on with such lies?” said the artilleryman.“There’s men who’d do it cheerful. What nonsense to pretend thereisn’t!”And I succumbed to his conviction.“If they come after me,” he said; “Lord, if they come after me!” andsubsided into a grim meditation.I sat contemplating these things. I could find nothing to bring againstthis man’s reasoning. In the days before the invasion no one would havequestioned my intellectual superiority to his—I, a professed andrecognised writer on philosophical themes, and he, a common soldier;and yet he had already formulated a situation that I had scarcelyrealised.“What are you doing?” I said presently. “What plans have you made?”He hesitated.“Well, it’s like this,” he said. “What have we to do? We have to inventa sort of life where men can live and breed, and be sufficiently secureto bring the children up. Yes—wait a bit, and I’ll make it clearer whatI think ought to be done. The tame ones will go like all tame beasts;in a few generations they’ll be big, beautiful, rich-blooded,stupid—rubbish! The risk is that we who keep wild will gosavage—degenerate into a sort of big, savage rat. . . . You see, how Imean to live is underground. I’ve been thinking about the drains. Ofcourse those who don’t know drains think horrible things; but underthis London are miles and miles—hundreds of miles—and a few days rainand London empty will leave them sweet and clean. The main drains arebig enough and airy enough for anyone. Then there’s cellars, vaults,stores, from which bolting passages may be made to the drains. And therailway tunnels and subways. Eh? You begin to see? And we form aband—able-bodied, clean-minded men. We’re not going to pick up anyrubbish that drifts in. Weaklings go out again.”“As you meant me to go?”“Well—I parleyed, didn’t I?”“We won’t quarrel about that. Go on.”“Those who stop obey orders. Able-bodied, clean-minded women we wantalso—mothers and teachers. No lackadaisical ladies—no blasted rollingeyes. We can’t have any weak or silly. Life is real again, and theuseless and cumbersome and mischievous have to die. They ought to die.They ought to be willing to die. It’s a sort of disloyalty, after all,to live and taint the race. And they can’t be happy. Moreover, dying’snone so dreadful; it’s the funking makes it bad. And in all thoseplaces we shall gather. Our district will be London. And we may even beable to keep a watch, and run about in the open when the Martians keepaway. Play cricket, perhaps. That’s how we shall save the race. Eh?It’s a possible thing? But saving the race is nothing in itself. As Isay, that’s only being rats. It’s saving our knowledge and adding to itis the thing. There men like you come in. There’s books, there’smodels. We must make great safe places down deep, and get all the bookswe can; not novels and poetry swipes, but ideas, science books. That’swhere men like you come in. We must go to the British Museum and pickall those books through. Especially we must keep up our science—learnmore. We must watch these Martians. Some of us must go as spies. Whenit’s all working, perhaps I will. Get caught, I mean. And the greatthing is, we must leave the Martians alone. We mustn’t even steal. Ifwe get in their way, we clear out. We must show them we mean no harm.Yes, I know. But they’re intelligent things, and they won’t hunt usdown if they have all they want, and think we’re just harmless vermin.”The artilleryman paused and laid a brown hand upon my arm.“After all, it may not be so much we may have to learn before—Justimagine this: four or five of their fighting machines suddenly startingoff—Heat-Rays right and left, and not a Martian in ’em. Not a Martianin ’em, but men—men who have learned the way how. It may be in my time,even—those men. Fancy having one of them lovely things, with itsHeat-Ray wide and free! Fancy having it in control! What would itmatter if you smashed to smithereens at the end of the run, after abust like that? I reckon the Martians’ll open their beautiful eyes!Can’t you see them, man? Can’t you see them hurrying, hurrying—puffingand blowing and hooting to their other mechanical affairs? Somethingout of gear in every case. And swish, bang, rattle, swish! Just as theyare fumbling over it, _swish_ comes the Heat-Ray, and, behold! man hascome back to his own.”For a while the imaginative daring of the artilleryman, and the tone ofassurance and courage he assumed, completely dominated my mind. Ibelieved unhesitatingly both in his forecast of human destiny and inthe practicability of his astonishing scheme, and the reader who thinksme susceptible and foolish must contrast his position, reading steadilywith all his thoughts about his subject, and mine, crouching fearfullyin the bushes and listening, distracted by apprehension. We talked inthis manner through the early morning time, and later crept out of thebushes, and, after scanning the sky for Martians, hurried precipitatelyto the house on Putney Hill where he had made his lair. It was the coalcellar of the place, and when I saw the work he had spent a weekupon—it was a burrow scarcely ten yards long, which he designed toreach to the main drain on Putney Hill—I had my first inkling of thegulf between his dreams and his powers. Such a hole I could have dug ina day. But I believed in him sufficiently to work with him all thatmorning until past midday at his digging. We had a garden barrow andshot the earth we removed against the kitchen range. We refreshedourselves with a tin of mock-turtle soup and wine from the neighbouringpantry. I found a curious relief from the aching strangeness of theworld in this steady labour. As we worked, I turned his project over inmy mind, and presently objections and doubts began to arise; but Iworked there all the morning, so glad was I to find myself with apurpose again. After working an hour I began to speculate on thedistance one had to go before the cloaca was reached, the chances wehad of missing it altogether. My immediate trouble was why we shoulddig this long tunnel, when it was possible to get into the drain atonce down one of the manholes, and work back to the house. It seemed tome, too, that the house was inconveniently chosen, and required aneedless length of tunnel. And just as I was beginning to face thesethings, the artilleryman stopped digging, and looked at me.“We’re working well,” he said. He put down his spade. “Let us knock offa bit” he said. “I think it’s time we reconnoitred from the roof of thehouse.”I was for going on, and after a little hesitation he resumed his spade;and then suddenly I was struck by a thought. I stopped, and so did heat once.“Why were you walking about the common,” I said, “instead of beinghere?”“Taking the air,” he said. “I was coming back. It’s safer by night.”“But the work?”“Oh, one can’t always work,” he said, and in a flash I saw the manplain. He hesitated, holding his spade. “We ought to reconnoitre now,”he said, “because if any come near they may hear the spades and dropupon us unawares.”I was no longer disposed to object. We went together to the roof andstood on a ladder peeping out of the roof door. No Martians were to beseen, and we ventured out on the tiles, and slipped down under shelterof the parapet.From this position a shrubbery hid the greater portion of Putney, butwe could see the river below, a bubbly mass of red weed, and the lowparts of Lambeth flooded and red. The red creeper swarmed up the treesabout the old palace, and their branches stretched gaunt and dead, andset with shrivelled leaves, from amid its clusters. It was strange howentirely dependent both these things were upon flowing water for theirpropagation. About us neither had gained a footing; laburnums, pinkmays, snowballs, and trees of arbor-vitae, rose out of laurels andhydrangeas, green and brilliant into the sunlight. Beyond Kensingtondense smoke was rising, and that and a blue haze hid the northwardhills.The artilleryman began to tell me of the sort of people who stillremained in London.“One night last week,” he said, “some fools got the electric light inorder, and there was all Regent Street and the Circus ablaze, crowdedwith painted and ragged drunkards, men and women, dancing and shoutingtill dawn. A man who was there told me. And as the day came they becameaware of a fighting-machine standing near by the Langham and lookingdown at them. Heaven knows how long he had been there. It must havegiven some of them a nasty turn. He came down the road towards them,and picked up nearly a hundred too drunk or frightened to run away.”Grotesque gleam of a time no history will ever fully describe!From that, in answer to my questions, he came round to his grandioseplans again. He grew enthusiastic. He talked so eloquently of thepossibility of capturing a fighting-machine that I more than halfbelieved in him again. But now that I was beginning to understandsomething of his quality, I could divine the stress he laid on doingnothing precipitately. And I noted that now there was no question thathe personally was to capture and fight the great machine.After a time we went down to the cellar. Neither of us seemed disposedto resume digging, and when he suggested a meal, I was nothing loath.He became suddenly very generous, and when we had eaten he went awayand returned with some excellent cigars. We lit these, and his optimismglowed. He was inclined to regard my coming as a great occasion.“There’s some champagne in the cellar,” he said.“We can dig better on this Thames-side burgundy,” said I.“No,” said he; “I am host today. Champagne! Great God! We’ve a heavyenough task before us! Let us take a rest and gather strength while wemay. Look at these blistered hands!”And pursuant to this idea of a holiday, he insisted upon playing cardsafter we had eaten. He taught me euchre, and after dividing Londonbetween us, I taking the northern side and he the southern, we playedfor parish points. Grotesque and foolish as this will seem to the soberreader, it is absolutely true, and what is more remarkable, I found thecard game and several others we played extremely interesting.Strange mind of man! that, with our species upon the edge ofextermination or appalling degradation, with no clear prospect beforeus but the chance of a horrible death, we could sit following thechance of this painted pasteboard, and playing the “joker” with vividdelight. Afterwards he taught me poker, and I beat him at three toughchess games. When dark came we decided to take the risk, and lit alamp.After an interminable string of games, we supped, and the artillerymanfinished the champagne. We went on smoking the cigars. He was no longerthe energetic regenerator of his species I had encountered in themorning. He was still optimistic, but it was a less kinetic, a morethoughtful optimism. I remember he wound up with my health, proposed ina speech of small variety and considerable intermittence. I took acigar, and went upstairs to look at the lights of which he had spokenthat blazed so greenly along the Highgate hills.At first I stared unintelligently across the London valley. Thenorthern hills were shrouded in darkness; the fires near Kensingtonglowed redly, and now and then an orange-red tongue of flame flashed upand vanished in the deep blue night. All the rest of London was black.Then, nearer, I perceived a strange light, a pale, violet-purplefluorescent glow, quivering under the night breeze. For a space I couldnot understand it, and then I knew that it must be the red weed fromwhich this faint irradiation proceeded. With that realisation mydormant sense of wonder, my sense of the proportion of things, awokeagain. I glanced from that to Mars, red and clear, glowing high in thewest, and then gazed long and earnestly at the darkness of Hampsteadand Highgate.I remained a very long time upon the roof, wondering at the grotesquechanges of the day. I recalled my mental states from the midnightprayer to the foolish card-playing. I had a violent revulsion offeeling. I remember I flung away the cigar with a certain wastefulsymbolism. My folly came to me with glaring exaggeration. I seemed atraitor to my wife and to my kind; I was filled with remorse. Iresolved to leave this strange undisciplined dreamer of great things tohis drink and gluttony, and to go on into London. There, it seemed tome, I had the best chance of learning what the Martians and myfellowmen were doing. I was still upon the roof when the late moonrose.VIII.DEAD LONDON.After I had parted from the artilleryman, I went down the hill, and bythe High Street across the bridge to Fulham. The red weed wastumultuous at that time, and nearly choked the bridge roadway; but itsfronds were already whitened in patches by the spreading disease thatpresently removed it so swiftly.At the corner of the lane that runs to Putney Bridge station I found aman lying. He was as black as a sweep with the black dust, alive, buthelplessly and speechlessly drunk. I could get nothing from him butcurses and furious lunges at my head. I think I should have stayed byhim but for the brutal expression of his face.There was black dust along the roadway from the bridge onwards, and itgrew thicker in Fulham. The streets were horribly quiet. I gotfood—sour, hard, and mouldy, but quite eatable—in a baker’s shop here.Some way towards Walham Green the streets became clear of powder, and Ipassed a white terrace of houses on fire; the noise of the burning wasan absolute relief. Going on towards Brompton, the streets were quietagain.Here I came once more upon the black powder in the streets and upondead bodies. I saw altogether about a dozen in the length of the FulhamRoad. They had been dead many days, so that I hurried quickly pastthem. The black powder covered them over, and softened their outlines.One or two had been disturbed by dogs.Where there was no black powder, it was curiously like a Sunday in theCity, with the closed shops, the houses locked up and the blinds drawn,the desertion, and the stillness. In some places plunderers had been atwork, but rarely at other than the provision and wine shops. Ajeweller’s window had been broken open in one place, but apparently thethief had been disturbed, and a number of gold chains and a watch layscattered on the pavement. I did not trouble to touch them. Farther onwas a tattered woman in a heap on a doorstep; the hand that hung overher knee was gashed and bled down her rusty brown dress, and a smashedmagnum of champagne formed a pool across the pavement. She seemedasleep, but she was dead.The farther I penetrated into London, the profounder grew thestillness. But it was not so much the stillness of death—it was thestillness of suspense, of expectation. At any time the destruction thathad already singed the northwestern borders of the metropolis, and hadannihilated Ealing and Kilburn, might strike among these houses andleave them smoking ruins. It was a city condemned and derelict. . . .In South Kensington the streets were clear of dead and of black powder.It was near South Kensington that I first heard the howling. It creptalmost imperceptibly upon my senses. It was a sobbing alternation oftwo notes, “Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” keeping on perpetually. When Ipassed streets that ran northward it grew in volume, and houses andbuildings seemed to deaden and cut it off again. It came in a full tidedown Exhibition Road. I stopped, staring towards Kensington Gardens,wondering at this strange, remote wailing. It was as if that mightydesert of houses had found a voice for its fear and solitude.“Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” wailed that superhuman note—great waves ofsound sweeping down the broad, sunlit roadway, between the tallbuildings on each side. I turned northwards, marvelling, towards theiron gates of Hyde Park. I had half a mind to break into the NaturalHistory Museum and find my way up to the summits of the towers, inorder to see across the park. But I decided to keep to the ground,where quick hiding was possible, and so went on up the Exhibition Road.All the large mansions on each side of the road were empty and still,and my footsteps echoed against the sides of the houses. At the top,near the park gate, I came upon a strange sight—a bus overturned, andthe skeleton of a horse picked clean. I puzzled over this for a time,and then went on to the bridge over the Serpentine. The voice grewstronger and stronger, though I could see nothing above the housetopson the north side of the park, save a haze of smoke to the northwest.“Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” cried the voice, coming, as it seemed to me,from the district about Regent’s Park. The desolating cry worked uponmy mind. The mood that had sustained me passed. The wailing tookpossession of me. I found I was intensely weary, footsore, and nowagain hungry and thirsty.It was already past noon. Why was I wandering alone in this city of thedead? Why was I alone when all London was lying in state, and in itsblack shroud? I felt intolerably lonely. My mind ran on old friendsthat I had forgotten for years. I thought of the poisons in thechemists’ shops, of the liquors the wine merchants stored; I recalledthe two sodden creatures of despair, who so far as I knew, shared thecity with myself. . . .I came into Oxford Street by the Marble Arch, and here again were blackpowder and several bodies, and an evil, ominous smell from the gratingsof the cellars of some of the houses. I grew very thirsty after theheat of my long walk. With infinite trouble I managed to break into apublic-house and get food and drink. I was weary after eating, and wentinto the parlour behind the bar, and slept on a black horsehair sofa Ifound there.I awoke to find that dismal howling still in my ears, “Ulla, ulla,ulla, ulla.” It was now dusk, and after I had routed out some biscuitsand a cheese in the bar—there was a meat safe, but it contained nothingbut maggots—I wandered on through the silent residential squares toBaker Street—Portman Square is the only one I can name—and so came outat last upon Regent’s Park. And as I emerged from the top of BakerStreet, I saw far away over the trees in the clearness of the sunsetthe hood of the Martian giant from which this howling proceeded. I wasnot terrified. I came upon him as if it were a matter of course. Iwatched him for some time, but he did not move. He appeared to bestanding and yelling, for no reason that I could discover.I tried to formulate a plan of action. That perpetual sound of “Ulla,ulla, ulla, ulla,” confused my mind. Perhaps I was too tired to be veryfearful. Certainly I was more curious to know the reason of thismonotonous crying than afraid. I turned back away from the park andstruck into Park Road, intending to skirt the park, went along underthe shelter of the terraces, and got a view of this stationary, howlingMartian from the direction of St. John’s Wood. A couple of hundredyards out of Baker Street I heard a yelping chorus, and saw, first adog with a piece of putrescent red meat in his jaws coming headlongtowards me, and then a pack of starving mongrels in pursuit of him. Hemade a wide curve to avoid me, as though he feared I might prove afresh competitor. As the yelping died away down the silent road, thewailing sound of “Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” reasserted itself.I came upon the wrecked handling-machine halfway to St. John’s Woodstation. At first I thought a house had fallen across the road. It wasonly as I clambered among the ruins that I saw, with a start, thismechanical Samson lying, with its tentacles bent and smashed andtwisted, among the ruins it had made. The forepart was shattered. Itseemed as if it had driven blindly straight at the house, and had beenoverwhelmed in its overthrow. It seemed to me then that this might havehappened by a handling-machine escaping from the guidance of itsMartian. I could not clamber among the ruins to see it, and thetwilight was now so far advanced that the blood with which its seat wassmeared, and the gnawed gristle of the Martian that the dogs had left,were invisible to me.Wondering still more at all that I had seen, I pushed on towardsPrimrose Hill. Far away, through a gap in the trees, I saw a secondMartian, as motionless as the first, standing in the park towards theZoological Gardens, and silent. A little beyond the ruins about thesmashed handling-machine I came upon the red weed again, and found theRegent’s Canal, a spongy mass of dark-red vegetation.As I crossed the bridge, the sound of “Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” ceased.It was, as it were, cut off. The silence came like a thunderclap.The dusky houses about me stood faint and tall and dim; the treestowards the park were growing black. All about me the red weedclambered among the ruins, writhing to get above me in the dimness.Night, the mother of fear and mystery, was coming upon me. But whilethat voice sounded the solitude, the desolation, had been endurable; byvirtue of it London had still seemed alive, and the sense of life aboutme had upheld me. Then suddenly a change, the passing of something—Iknew not what—and then a stillness that could be felt. Nothing but thisgaunt quiet.London about me gazed at me spectrally. The windows in the white houseswere like the eye sockets of skulls. About me my imagination found athousand noiseless enemies moving. Terror seized me, a horror of mytemerity. In front of me the road became pitchy black as though it wastarred, and I saw a contorted shape lying across the pathway. I couldnot bring myself to go on. I turned down St. John’s Wood Road, and ranheadlong from this unendurable stillness towards Kilburn. I hid fromthe night and the silence, until long after midnight, in a cabmen’sshelter in Harrow Road. But before the dawn my courage returned, andwhile the stars were still in the sky I turned once more towardsRegent’s Park. I missed my way among the streets, and presently sawdown a long avenue, in the half-light of the early dawn, the curve ofPrimrose Hill. On the summit, towering up to the fading stars, was athird Martian, erect and motionless like the others.An insane resolve possessed me. I would die and end it. And I wouldsave myself even the trouble of killing myself. I marched on recklesslytowards this Titan, and then, as I drew nearer and the light grew, Isaw that a multitude of black birds was circling and clustering aboutthe hood. At that my heart gave a bound, and I began running along theroad.I hurried through the red weed that choked St. Edmund’s Terrace (Iwaded breast-high across a torrent of water that was rushing down fromthe waterworks towards the Albert Road), and emerged upon the grassbefore the rising of the sun. Great mounds had been heaped about thecrest of the hill, making a huge redoubt of it—it was the final andlargest place the Martians had made—and from behind these heaps thererose a thin smoke against the sky. Against the sky line an eager dogran and disappeared. The thought that had flashed into my mind grewreal, grew credible. I felt no fear, only a wild, trembling exultation,as I ran up the hill towards the motionless monster. Out of the hoodhung lank shreds of brown, at which the hungry birds pecked and tore.In another moment I had scrambled up the earthen rampart and stood uponits crest, and the interior of the redoubt was below me. A mighty spaceit was, with gigantic machines here and there within it, huge mounds ofmaterial and strange shelter places. And scattered about it, some intheir overturned war-machines, some in the now rigid handling-machines,and a dozen of them stark and silent and laid in a row, were theMartians—_dead_!—slain by the putrefactive and disease bacteria againstwhich their systems were unprepared; slain as the red weed was beingslain; slain, after all man’s devices had failed, by the humblestthings that God, in his wisdom, has put upon this earth.For so it had come about, as indeed I and many men might have foreseenhad not terror and disaster blinded our minds. These germs of diseasehave taken toll of humanity since the beginning of things—taken toll ofour prehuman ancestors since life began here. But by virtue of thisnatural selection of our kind we have developed resisting power; to nogerms do we succumb without a struggle, and to many—those that causeputrefaction in dead matter, for instance—our living frames arealtogether immune. But there are no bacteria in Mars, and directlythese invaders arrived, directly they drank and fed, our microscopicallies began to work their overthrow. Already when I watched them theywere irrevocably doomed, dying and rotting even as they went to andfro. It was inevitable. By the toll of a billion deaths man has boughthis birthright of the earth, and it is his against all comers; it wouldstill be his were the Martians ten times as mighty as they are. Forneither do men live nor die in vain.Here and there they were scattered, nearly fifty altogether, in thatgreat gulf they had made, overtaken by a death that must have seemed tothem as incomprehensible as any death could be. To me also at that timethis death was incomprehensible. All I knew was that these things thathad been alive and so terrible to men were dead. For a moment Ibelieved that the destruction of Sennacherib had been repeated, thatGod had repented, that the Angel of Death had slain them in the night.I stood staring into the pit, and my heart lightened gloriously, evenas the rising sun struck the world to fire about me with his rays. Thepit was still in darkness; the mighty engines, so great and wonderfulin their power and complexity, so unearthly in their tortuous forms,rose weird and vague and strange out of the shadows towards the light.A multitude of dogs, I could hear, fought over the bodies that laydarkly in the depth of the pit, far below me. Across the pit on itsfarther lip, flat and vast and strange, lay the great flying-machinewith which they had been experimenting upon our denser atmosphere whendecay and death arrested them. Death had come not a day too soon. Atthe sound of a cawing overhead I looked up at the huge fighting-machinethat would fight no more for ever, at the tattered red shreds of fleshthat dripped down upon the overturned seats on the summit of PrimroseHill.I turned and looked down the slope of the hill to where, enhaloed nowin birds, stood those other two Martians that I had seen overnight,just as death had overtaken them. The one had died, even as it had beencrying to its companions; perhaps it was the last to die, and its voicehad gone on perpetually until the force of its machinery was exhausted.They glittered now, harmless tripod towers of shining metal, in thebrightness of the rising sun.All about the pit, and saved as by a miracle from everlastingdestruction, stretched the great Mother of Cities. Those who have onlyseen London veiled in her sombre robes of smoke can scarcely imaginethe naked clearness and beauty of the silent wilderness of houses.Eastward, over the blackened ruins of the Albert Terrace and thesplintered spire of the church, the sun blazed dazzling in a clear sky,and here and there some facet in the great wilderness of roofs caughtthe light and glared with a white intensity.Northward were Kilburn and Hampsted, blue and crowded with houses;westward the great city was dimmed; and southward, beyond the Martians,the green waves of Regent’s Park, the Langham Hotel, the dome of theAlbert Hall, the Imperial Institute, and the giant mansions of theBrompton Road came out clear and little in the sunrise, the jaggedruins of Westminster rising hazily beyond. Far away and blue were theSurrey hills, and the towers of the Crystal Palace glittered like twosilver rods. The dome of St. Paul’s was dark against the sunrise, andinjured, I saw for the first time, by a huge gaping cavity on itswestern side.And as I looked at this wide expanse of houses and factories andchurches, silent and abandoned; as I thought of the multitudinous hopesand efforts, the innumerable hosts of lives that had gone to build thishuman reef, and of the swift and ruthless destruction that had hungover it all; when I realised that the shadow had been rolled back, andthat men might still live in the streets, and this dear vast dead cityof mine be once more alive and powerful, I felt a wave of emotion thatwas near akin to tears.The torment was over. Even that day the healing would begin. Thesurvivors of the people scattered over the country—leaderless, lawless,foodless, like sheep without a shepherd—the thousands who had fled bysea, would begin to return; the pulse of life, growing stronger andstronger, would beat again in the empty streets and pour across thevacant squares. Whatever destruction was done, the hand of thedestroyer was stayed. All the gaunt wrecks, the blackened skeletons ofhouses that stared so dismally at the sunlit grass of the hill, wouldpresently be echoing with the hammers of the restorers and ringing withthe tapping of their trowels. At the thought I extended my handstowards the sky and began thanking God. In a year, thought I—in a year.. . .With overwhelming force came the thought of myself, of my wife, and theold life of hope and tender helpfulness that had ceased for ever.IX.WRECKAGE.And now comes the strangest thing in my story. Yet, perhaps, it is notaltogether strange. I remember, clearly and coldly and vividly, allthat I did that day until the time that I stood weeping and praisingGod upon the summit of Primrose Hill. And then I forget.Of the next three days I know nothing. I have learned since that, sofar from my being the first discoverer of the Martian overthrow,several such wanderers as myself had already discovered this on theprevious night. One man—the first—had gone to St. Martin’s-le-Grand,and, while I sheltered in the cabmen’s hut, had contrived to telegraphto Paris. Thence the joyful news had flashed all over the world; athousand cities, chilled by ghastly apprehensions, suddenly flashedinto frantic illuminations; they knew of it in Dublin, Edinburgh,Manchester, Birmingham, at the time when I stood upon the verge of thepit. Already men, weeping with joy, as I have heard, shouting andstaying their work to shake hands and shout, were making up trains,even as near as Crewe, to descend upon London. The church bells thathad ceased a fortnight since suddenly caught the news, until allEngland was bell-ringing. Men on cycles, lean-faced, unkempt, scorchedalong every country lane shouting of unhoped deliverance, shouting togaunt, staring figures of despair. And for the food! Across theChannel, across the Irish Sea, across the Atlantic, corn, bread, andmeat were tearing to our relief. All the shipping in the world seemedgoing Londonward in those days. But of all this I have no memory. Idrifted—a demented man. I found myself in a house of kindly people, whohad found me on the third day wandering, weeping, and raving throughthe streets of St. John’s Wood. They have told me since that I wassinging some insane doggerel about “The Last Man Left Alive! Hurrah!The Last Man Left Alive!” Troubled as they were with their own affairs,these people, whose name, much as I would like to express my gratitudeto them, I may not even give here, nevertheless cumbered themselveswith me, sheltered me, and protected me from myself. Apparently theyhad learned something of my story from me during the days of my lapse.Very gently, when my mind was assured again, did they break to me whatthey had learned of the fate of Leatherhead. Two days after I wasimprisoned it had been destroyed, with every soul in it, by a Martian.He had swept it out of existence, as it seemed, without anyprovocation, as a boy might crush an ant hill, in the mere wantonnessof power.I was a lonely man, and they were very kind to me. I was a lonely manand a sad one, and they bore with me. I remained with them four daysafter my recovery. All that time I felt a vague, a growing craving tolook once more on whatever remained of the little life that seemed sohappy and bright in my past. It was a mere hopeless desire to feastupon my misery. They dissuaded me. They did all they could to divert mefrom this morbidity. But at last I could resist the impulse no longer,and, promising faithfully to return to them, and parting, as I willconfess, from these four-day friends with tears, I went out again intothe streets that had lately been so dark and strange and empty.Already they were busy with returning people; in places even there wereshops open, and I saw a drinking fountain running water.I remember how mockingly bright the day seemed as I went back on mymelancholy pilgrimage to the little house at Woking, how busy thestreets and vivid the moving life about me. So many people were abroadeverywhere, busied in a thousand activities, that it seemed incrediblethat any great proportion of the population could have been slain. Butthen I noticed how yellow were the skins of the people I met, howshaggy the hair of the men, how large and bright their eyes, and thatevery other man still wore his dirty rags. Their faces seemed all withone of two expressions—a leaping exultation and energy or a grimresolution. Save for the expression of the faces, London seemed a cityof tramps. The vestries were indiscriminately distributing bread sentus by the French government. The ribs of the few horses showeddismally. Haggard special constables with white badges stood at thecorners of every street. I saw little of the mischief wrought by theMartians until I reached Wellington Street, and there I saw the redweed clambering over the buttresses of Waterloo Bridge.At the corner of the bridge, too, I saw one of the common contrasts ofthat grotesque time—a sheet of paper flaunting against a thicket of thered weed, transfixed by a stick that kept it in place. It was theplacard of the first newspaper to resume publication—the _Daily Mail_.I bought a copy for a blackened shilling I found in my pocket. Most ofit was in blank, but the solitary compositor who did the thing hadamused himself by making a grotesque scheme of advertisement stereo onthe back page. The matter he printed was emotional; the newsorganisation had not as yet found its way back. I learned nothing freshexcept that already in one week the examination of the Martianmechanisms had yielded astonishing results. Among other things, thearticle assured me what I did not believe at the time, that the “Secretof Flying,” was discovered. At Waterloo I found the free trains thatwere taking people to their homes. The first rush was already over.There were few people in the train, and I was in no mood for casualconversation. I got a compartment to myself, and sat with folded arms,looking greyly at the sunlit devastation that flowed past the windows.And just outside the terminus the train jolted over temporary rails,and on either side of the railway the houses were blackened ruins. ToClapham Junction the face of London was grimy with powder of the BlackSmoke, in spite of two days of thunderstorms and rain, and at ClaphamJunction the line had been wrecked again; there were hundreds ofout-of-work clerks and shopmen working side by side with the customarynavvies, and we were jolted over a hasty relaying.All down the line from there the aspect of the country was gaunt andunfamiliar; Wimbledon particularly had suffered. Walton, by virtue ofits unburned pine woods, seemed the least hurt of any place along theline. The Wandle, the Mole, every little stream, was a heaped mass ofred weed, in appearance between butcher’s meat and pickled cabbage. TheSurrey pine woods were too dry, however, for the festoons of the redclimber. Beyond Wimbledon, within sight of the line, in certain nurserygrounds, were the heaped masses of earth about the sixth cylinder. Anumber of people were standing about it, and some sappers were busy inthe midst of it. Over it flaunted a Union Jack, flapping cheerfully inthe morning breeze. The nursery grounds were everywhere crimson withthe weed, a wide expanse of livid colour cut with purple shadows, andvery painful to the eye. One’s gaze went with infinite relief from thescorched greys and sullen reds of the foreground to the blue-greensoftness of the eastward hills.The line on the London side of Woking station was still undergoingrepair, so I descended at Byfleet station and took the road to Maybury,past the place where I and the artilleryman had talked to the hussars,and on by the spot where the Martian had appeared to me in thethunderstorm. Here, moved by curiosity, I turned aside to find, among atangle of red fronds, the warped and broken dog cart with the whitenedbones of the horse scattered and gnawed. For a time I stood regardingthese vestiges. . . .Then I returned through the pine wood, neck-high with red weed here andthere, to find the landlord of the Spotted Dog had already foundburial, and so came home past the College Arms. A man standing at anopen cottage door greeted me by name as I passed.I looked at my house with a quick flash of hope that faded immediately.The door had been forced; it was unfast and was opening slowly as Iapproached.It slammed again. The curtains of my study fluttered out of the openwindow from which I and the artilleryman had watched the dawn. No onehad closed it since. The smashed bushes were just as I had left themnearly four weeks ago. I stumbled into the hall, and the house feltempty. The stair carpet was ruffled and discoloured where I hadcrouched, soaked to the skin from the thunderstorm the night of thecatastrophe. Our muddy footsteps I saw still went up the stairs.I followed them to my study, and found lying on my writing-table still,with the selenite paper weight upon it, the sheet of work I had left onthe afternoon of the opening of the cylinder. For a space I stoodreading over my abandoned arguments. It was a paper on the probabledevelopment of Moral Ideas with the development of the civilisingprocess; and the last sentence was the opening of a prophecy: “In abouttwo hundred years,” I had written, “we may expect——” The sentence endedabruptly. I remembered my inability to fix my mind that morning,scarcely a month gone by, and how I had broken off to get my _DailyChronicle_ from the newsboy. I remembered how I went down to the gardengate as he came along, and how I had listened to his odd story of “Menfrom Mars.”I came down and went into the dining room. There were the mutton andthe bread, both far gone now in decay, and a beer bottle overturned,just as I and the artilleryman had left them. My home was desolate. Iperceived the folly of the faint hope I had cherished so long. And thena strange thing occurred. “It is no use,” said a voice. “The house isdeserted. No one has been here these ten days. Do not stay here totorment yourself. No one escaped but you.”I was startled. Had I spoken my thought aloud? I turned, and the Frenchwindow was open behind me. I made a step to it, and stood looking out.And there, amazed and afraid, even as I stood amazed and afraid, weremy cousin and my wife—my wife white and tearless. She gave a faint cry.“I came,” she said. “I knew—knew——”She put her hand to her throat—swayed. I made a step forward, andcaught her in my arms.X.THE EPILOGUE.I cannot but regret, now that I am concluding my story, how little I amable to contribute to the discussion of the many debatable questionswhich are still unsettled. In one respect I shall certainly provokecriticism. My particular province is speculative philosophy. Myknowledge of comparative physiology is confined to a book or two, butit seems to me that Carver’s suggestions as to the reason of the rapiddeath of the Martians is so probable as to be regarded almost as aproven conclusion. I have assumed that in the body of my narrative.At any rate, in all the bodies of the Martians that were examined afterthe war, no bacteria except those already known as terrestrial specieswere found. That they did not bury any of their dead, and the recklessslaughter they perpetrated, point also to an entire ignorance of theputrefactive process. But probable as this seems, it is by no means aproven conclusion.Neither is the composition of the Black Smoke known, which the Martiansused with such deadly effect, and the generator of the Heat-Raysremains a puzzle. The terrible disasters at the Ealing and SouthKensington laboratories have disinclined analysts for furtherinvestigations upon the latter. Spectrum analysis of the black powderpoints unmistakably to the presence of an unknown element with abrilliant group of three lines in the green, and it is possible that itcombines with argon to form a compound which acts at once with deadlyeffect upon some constituent in the blood. But such unprovenspeculations will scarcely be of interest to the general reader, towhom this story is addressed. None of the brown scum that drifted downthe Thames after the destruction of Shepperton was examined at thetime, and now none is forthcoming.The results of an anatomical examination of the Martians, so far as theprowling dogs had left such an examination possible, I have alreadygiven. But everyone is familiar with the magnificent and almostcomplete specimen in spirits at the Natural History Museum, and thecountless drawings that have been made from it; and beyond that theinterest of their physiology and structure is purely scientific.A question of graver and universal interest is the possibility ofanother attack from the Martians. I do not think that nearly enoughattention is being given to this aspect of the matter. At present theplanet Mars is in conjunction, but with every return to opposition I,for one, anticipate a renewal of their adventure. In any case, weshould be prepared. It seems to me that it should be possible to definethe position of the gun from which the shots are discharged, to keep asustained watch upon this part of the planet, and to anticipate thearrival of the next attack.In that case the cylinder might be destroyed with dynamite or artillerybefore it was sufficiently cool for the Martians to emerge, or theymight be butchered by means of guns so soon as the screw opened. Itseems to me that they have lost a vast advantage in the failure oftheir first surprise. Possibly they see it in the same light.Lessing has advanced excellent reasons for supposing that the Martianshave actually succeeded in effecting a landing on the planet Venus.Seven months ago now, Venus and Mars were in alignment with the sun;that is to say, Mars was in opposition from the point of view of anobserver on Venus. Subsequently a peculiar luminous and sinuous markingappeared on the unillumined half of the inner planet, and almostsimultaneously a faint dark mark of a similar sinuous character wasdetected upon a photograph of the Martian disk. One needs to see thedrawings of these appearances in order to appreciate fully theirremarkable resemblance in character.At any rate, whether we expect another invasion or not, our views ofthe human future must be greatly modified by these events. We havelearned now that we cannot regard this planet as being fenced in and asecure abiding place for Man; we can never anticipate the unseen goodor evil that may come upon us suddenly out of space. It may be that inthe larger design of the universe this invasion from Mars is notwithout its ultimate benefit for men; it has robbed us of that sereneconfidence in the future which is the most fruitful source ofdecadence, the gifts to human science it has brought are enormous, andit has done much to promote the conception of the commonweal ofmankind. It may be that across the immensity of space the Martians havewatched the fate of these pioneers of theirs and learned their lesson,and that on the planet Venus they have found a securer settlement. Bethat as it may, for many years yet there will certainly be norelaxation of the eager scrutiny of the Martian disk, and those fierydarts of the sky, the shooting stars, will bring with them as they fallan unavoidable apprehension to all the sons of men.The broadening of men’s views that has resulted can scarcely beexaggerated. Before the cylinder fell there was a general persuasionthat through all the deep of space no life existed beyond the pettysurface of our minute sphere. Now we see further. If the Martians canreach Venus, there is no reason to suppose that the thing is impossiblefor men, and when the slow cooling of the sun makes this earthuninhabitable, as at last it must do, it may be that the thread of lifethat has begun here will have streamed out and caught our sister planetwithin its toils.Dim and wonderful is the vision I have conjured up in my mind of lifespreading slowly from this little seed bed of the solar systemthroughout the inanimate vastness of sidereal space. But that is aremote dream. It may be, on the other hand, that the destruction of theMartians is only a reprieve. To them, and not to us, perhaps, is thefuture ordained.I must confess the stress and danger of the time have left an abidingsense of doubt and insecurity in my mind. I sit in my study writing bylamplight, and suddenly I see again the healing valley below set withwrithing flames, and feel the house behind and about me empty anddesolate. I go out into the Byfleet Road, and vehicles pass me, abutcher boy in a cart, a cabful of visitors, a workman on a bicycle,children going to school, and suddenly they become vague and unreal,and I hurry again with the artilleryman through the hot, broodingsilence. Of a night I see the black powder darkening the silentstreets, and the contorted bodies shrouded in that layer; they riseupon me tattered and dog-bitten. They gibber and grow fiercer, paler,uglier, mad distortions of humanity at last, and I wake, cold andwretched, in the darkness of the night.I go to London and see the busy multitudes in Fleet Street and theStrand, and it comes across my mind that they are but the ghosts of thepast, haunting the streets that I have seen silent and wretched, goingto and fro, phantasms in a dead city, the mockery of life in agalvanised body. And strange, too, it is to stand on Primrose Hill, asI did but a day before writing this last chapter, to see the greatprovince of houses, dim and blue through the haze of the smoke andmist, vanishing at last into the vague lower sky, to see the peoplewalking to and fro among the flower beds on the hill, to see thesight-seers about the Martian machine that stands there still, to hearthe tumult of playing children, and to recall the time when I saw itall bright and clear-cut, hard and silent, under the dawn of that lastgreat day. . . .And strangest of all is it to hold my wife’s hand again, and to thinkthat I have counted her, and that she has counted me, among the dead.